If someone's menstrual cycle is
irregular, should they be concerned?
>> Yes.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Your body is meant to
work like clockwork.
>> And our monthly cycle is so much more
than getting ready to have a baby,
especially when we're looking at
exercise. And it's important to say if
you don't have a period, it's very
harmful to long-term health, brain
health, mental health, low energy, mood,
and libido. And I don't want the younger
generations to have to go through the
stuff that we've gone through. So, it's
an important discussion that we need to
have. We are joined by four leading
female health experts from very
different fields
>> to have a crucial conversation about
women's health. With over 80 years
combined experience, they're sharing the
truth about what every woman and every
man needs to hear.
>> We asked a thousand women to submit
their questions ahead of this
conversation. And I got so many
questions around fertility,
understanding hormones, PCOS, birth
control pill, miscarriage.
>> And I'll say this, Stephen, it's because
we haven't had these discussions
publicly. When we look at funding in
women's health, it's horrible. like less
than 1% is spent on women over 40.
>> Women are living 20% more of our lives
with chronic disease or mental health
disorders. I mean 50% of patients with
unexplained infertility have
indometriosis. But yet it takes women 7
to 10 years to get a diagnosis after
symptoms start. But also there are
things that we do that will inherently
harm our fertility because we're not
taught this and it predisposes you to
many medical problems later in life.
>> And patients will say but I have a
really high pain tolerance like it's a
badge. And so they gaslight themselves.
And that's what we're all trying to
fight here. But there are a lot of
things we can do to deal with this.
>> And then I want to talk about menopause.
>> So in medical school, menopause just
gets shoved into a tiny box. This is a
scary statistic. So Oh my god,
>> it's crazy.
>> I just think it's insane. This is why we
need to create change.
This might be one of the most important
conversations we ever have on the diio
because women's health has long been a
total mystery to so many people and so
many people are struggling with all of
the issues that we're going to talk
about today with their menstrual cycles,
PCOS, endometriosis, with diet, with
understanding how to exercise as a
woman. It's probably never going to be
the case again that these four
individuals that at the very top of
women's health in their fields will be
in the same place at the same time
having this conversation. We structured
this conversation into two parts. They
cover completely different subjects, but
they're fundamentally interlin. For me,
the understanding that I got from this
conversation at this table with these
four women has fundamentally changed my
life. It's going to change how I deal
with my romantic partner, my sister, my
team members that I work with every
single day. And funnily enough, because
it's a conversation I wouldn't have
clicked as a man, it turned out to be
the conversation that I needed the most.
And I don't think I've ever said this
before, but if there was ever an episode
to share with a loved one, then this is
that episode. Please share this episode
with as many women as you can, but also
with as many men as you can.
[Music]
Ladies, we should start with some
introductions. Could you give me a brief
introduction, Stacy, as it relates to
your perspective and your experience and
what your sort of bias is as it comes to
this debate? When I say bias, I mean
your your your experience and your your
research that you're lending to this
conversation today.
>> I come from the exercise fizz and sports
med background. Um, so I'm always
looking through the lens of activity and
nutrition and how that has a impact on
our stress and our stress outcomes and
how we can adapt to specific applied
stressors especially when we're looking
at improving health span, improving
mood, improving body composition, all of
those things. I've worked with and still
work with uh the subset of active women.
Um, I come from an endurance and a
high-profile high performance sport
background. So, that's where I've gotten
my chops and then brought it over into
the general recreational female athlete
kind of perspective. Natalie,
>> I'm a fertility doctor and every day I
help patients with IVF get pregnant
because I have an IVF clinic. But my big
passion has always been natural
fertility after I experienced my own
pregnancy losses. trying to understand
how we interact with the world and how
that changes our hormones and help women
understand what their hormones are, what
natural fertility is, what happens as we
age to our bodies, our eggs and our
hormones, and let them be better
stewards of their own fertility and
their own health decisions.
>> Mary,
>> I have a background in general OBGYn, so
I'm considered to be a women's health
specialist. And it wasn't until I kind
of went through my own menopause that I
realized that there was significant gap
in my training. You know, hearing
watching Dr. Sims on um I think your
podcast talking about how women are not
little men really struck such a chord
with me and made me realize I was
siloing women's health to the
reproductive organs, the breast, the
uterus, the ovaries, the vagina and that
if I really wanted to make a difference
in a woman's whole health life, this
last 30 years, 30, 40 years of her life,
I needed to refocus
what we were thinking about women's
health for the long term. So I come from
a background in academics. I was a
professor for 20 years. I was a
residency program director. Stepped away
from that so I could focus on the lack
of my own education and knowledge in
menopause care. And now I want to step
back into the academic world to bring
everything I've learned and change the
way we educate our providers. Vonda
>> I am a orthopedic sports surgeon by
training and I sit at the unique
juxtaposition of orthopedics and
performance having taken care of elite
athletes most of my life aging and
longevity most of my academic research I
too as an academic is on subjects of
muscularkeeletal aging but many years
ago added a third circle of the whole
health of a woman and so sitting in this
place it fits directly into the mantra
of my career which has always been I am
going to change the way we age in this
country and the world because the tool
that I bring to the table is the fact
that if I save your mobility I'm going
to save you from the ravages of chronic
disease and so the work that I do is not
only educational it's uh research and
it's now education of the world about
these subjects
>> explain this to me like I'm an idiot
ladies why do we need to have a
conversation about women's health and
not just health broadly.
>> I think the statistic that people don't
realize on a day-to-day basis is that
women are 51% of the population. We're
actually not a minority. We're the
majority and yet often our health, our
healthc care access, the research treats
us as if we're a niche product,
>> but we are the majority product.
We have to have this conversation
because data show that
of the $450 billion dollars spent on
research in this country alone, less
than 1% is spent on women over 40.
>> And yet we are nearly 90 million people.
And we make 80% of all the health care
decisions in this country for ourselves
and everyone we touch. And so even
though when you look at the the
long-term data, women are winning the
longevity race here. We're living an
average of 6 years longer than men. But
as all of us talk about all the time,
women suffer longer.
>> Yeah.
>> We're living 20% more of our lives
versus our male counterparts in poor
health with chronic disease or mental
health disorders. And so McKenzie looked
at the data and it was for the Gates
Foundation and what they found was yes,
we live longer. We've all known that.
However, we have, you know, twice as
high of mental health disorders. We're
two times as more likely to end up in a
nursing home. We are much more likely to
lose our long-term independence from
frailty or dementia, much more than our
age matched male counterparts. And
that's I think what we're all trying to
fight here. And diseases that impact
women specifically and only things like
PCOS, endometriosis are extensively
underfunded and not researched. It takes
women 7 to 10 years to get a diagnosis
of endometriosis after symptoms start.
And we know this is a disease that
impacts your entire body in addition to
your fertility. But women are dismissed.
They're not taken seriously. and there's
not research guiding what we can do in a
lot of these situations to try to help
them the best.
>> Why isn't the research there? Why why
don't they research if women are the
majority of the population? Why is all
the funding going to researching men?
>> You have to think about who was in the
room when medicine and science first
started. So if you think about back when
the industrial revolution and the
modernization of what we know is
medicine, women were pushed out because
they were believed to have smaller
brains. thanks to Darwin and not thought
to have a seat at the table. So when
you're thinking about designing studies,
it was pretty much designed on the male
physiology on the male body and then
women were an afterthought. So there
wasn't any real in-depth look of well
women are different from birth or in
utero XX is different from XY. So all
the research has just been generalized
to women. Even things like aspirin for
heart attacks and thinning blood
>> inhibitors. Yeah, all of this all of
this was done on men and then just
generalized to women and now that we're
having this global conversation on
women's health, people are like, well,
where is the information specific for
women? And there's just a very small
subset. So, we're looking and trying to
expand that, but we have a lot of
catching up to do. And that's primarily
not only because of what you said, but
the shocking statistic is that not until
were women required to be represented in
studies. 1993,
I mean, we were all far into our our
lives in research by then.
>> Isn't that a shocking?
>> That's crazy.
>> And there were still loopholes where
people were finding ways to exclude
women and then
>> right, we're still not at 50%. No,
>> we're harder to study. You have
menstrual cycle, hormonal fluctuations,
even menopause, pre even the animal
models.
>> It's not that we're harder to study. It
just makes it presumed harder to study.
There's more variables at play,
>> right? It's more of a complexity to the
research, but it's not more difficult.
And this is where I bring it in. It's
like if a woman had a seat at the table
when all the study designs were started,
it wouldn't be a question. It would just
have been assimilated in. because we've
been so drawn into we have a crossover,
here's one week crossover, next week
because of male physiology. When you add
women's hormone fluctuations and people
like, "Oh, it's too complex."
>> Right? But it's not.
>> What is it that makes, and this is a
super dumb question, but an important
one. What is it that makes men and women
different from a physiological
standpoint? Because to understand why
research would need to be done
separately, we need to understand the
differences.
>> Yeah. Well, I mean, we can look from a
morphological standpoint where men have
more of our fast twitch fibers. Women
are born with more endurance fibers,
>> which is muscle, right?
>> Uh when we're talking about muscle.
Yeah. So, uh men have more of the
ability to do power and and really fast
energetic type activities or women are
more attuned to endurance type
activities. And this affects metabolism.
It affects blood glucose homeostasis.
And when we're looking at bone and bone
density, men have stronger bones. Uh
they can acquire more load. They hold on
to it better than women do. We see
smaller lungs, smaller heart, less
hemoglobin in women than men. And that's
an offshoot of what testosterone does.
So there are just basic physiological
differences between XX and XY that
people don't really assimilate and
understand. And the way I like to say it
is you go into a shop and you have a
men's section and a women's section and
there are touch points on the external
that really identify gender andor sex.
But when you look intrinsically no one
is identifying those touch points until
now. Also when we look at how we disease
so in cardiovascular disease is is
aththeroscerotic disease is the best
example. Men tend to have their
blockages. So aththeroscerotic disease
is basically the plaques that build up
in the coronary arteries around the
heart. Men tend to develop their plaques
very early right as those arteries exit
the aorta and dive into the heart
muscle. So we get what we call the
widowmaker. Okay? It's called that for a
reason because men die and they make a
widow. And so that's the left anterior
descending artery. Women by and large
tend to not have these larger artery
blockages, but their blockages are
diffuse and microvascular deeper into
the heart muscle, which is why we
present with a heart attack much
differently than a man does. And those
we're not teaching our, you know, we're
not educating our clinicians as to these
differences. Women are considered to
have atypical chest pain. Dr. Wright,
51% of the population is female. Why are
why is my heart attack atypical
>> and a man's typical? But this happens
not only at the organ level. It makes
sense that if we have a population with
XX chromosomes, a population with XY
genetically and the way we express those
genes are differently. But I think we
miss the fact that down to a cellular
level, every cell from an XX is
expresses these tissue changes, tissue
manifestations differently than an XY.
Our lab used to study, we called them
muscle derived stem cells so 20 years
ago. Now they're called satellite cells.
But when we harvested them and asked
them to behave and in different
environments,
satellite cells from XX people and XX
animals, women, females were better
under the same circumstances
experimentally
at making cartilage and muscle. XY male
were better under the same circumstances
in making bone. So down to a cellular
level, we express our genes differently.
It should be no mystery to us or anybody
else that there are differences. And yet
there is the propensity just to lump us
all in the same basket and almost say I
almost sometimes feel as pjorative to
say, oh the women are different. Of
course they're different. Yeah,
>> we're genetically different
>> down to every cell in our body.
>> Every cell. So, it should be no surprise
to anybody, but it it seems to be a
surprise.
>> Seems to be a surprise all the time.
Yeah. I get pushed back all the time.
There's no difference. Yes, there is.
There is. And it's not just bad. It's
just is.
>> Yeah. There's Yeah.
>> Because at one point that was quite a
controversial thing to say, wasn't it?
To point at the differences between men
and women.
>> Mhm. Outside of, you know, our different
organs. Yeah. You know.
>> Yeah. And because of this research gap
and the bias in medicine, um, women have
been misunderstood by their male
counterparts in a number of ways. I
remember I think it was you, Mary, that
was telling me about this whiny women
thing that you were exposed to.
>> When I was in training and and you all
may have similar stories and I just
heard a new one the other day, my first
patient in gynecology clinic, I'm an
intern. I'm very excited. You know, we
have our stacks of charts. That's how
old I am. We had paper charts. I pick up
the chart, open it up. It's a
40-year-old woman with multiple vague
complaints. She's gained some weight.
She's a little bit depressed. Her libido
is off. Her blood pressure is a little
bit up. Her cholesterol is starting to
rise. And she's seen family medicine.
Like we're the third or fourth doctor at
this point. And so my upper level who
happened to be male this, you know, it
could have been anyone. Walks down the
hall in his cowboy boots cuz Texas. And
um and he's like, "What you got?" And I
said, "Well, I have Miss Smith,
whomever, you know, she's a 40-year-old
woman with." And I list the complaints.
And he goes, "Did you check her thyroid?
Family medicine did. Did you check this,
you know, a few simple labs?" And he
goes, "Hm,
you got a WW."
And I said, "What's I don't know this,
you know." And he said, "Uh, don't write
this in the chart, but we call that a
whiny woman around here."
>> Oh my gosh.
>> And I said, "Okay." He said, "Listen,
women just tend to go through this at
this age, and we're not really going to
be able to help her. pat her on the
knee, tell her to have some wine, go on
date night, you know, she'll get better,
but we're not going to be able to help
her. And that stayed with me. Now, I
was, you know, a good girl. I did what I
was told. You know, it took me 20 years
of internalization to realize this, you
know, I don't want to blame him. He's
not a bad guy. This was taught to him.
But this kind of thinking, I mean, I saw
this in the ER. I saw this in the O. I
saw this in every clinic. And so I've
asked other clinicians around the
country and I've heard whiny gyne status
Hispanicus total TBD total body delore
like in different regional areas there
was a name for this kind of vague
complaints from this middle-aged woman
and we couldn't quite put our finger on
it and I realized this was systemic bias
built into the system where women and
there's historical you know precedent
for this the wandering uterus the
hysteria you know these were real
medical terms just until like not even a
generation ago.
>> Yeah. They used to put women into
asylums.
>> Yeah.
>> Because of hysteria and it was hot
flashes, all the things that that are
now known with permenopause. They used
to think it was some kind of insanity
and put women into insane asylums to
lock them down.
>> But this is pervasive. Not just an OB.
You're not the only guilty. It's every
medical subsp specialty has some
culture
of for lack of better words blowing
women off it right. We're not having the
curiosity that defines medicine. We are
supposed to be curious people. But yet
when it comes to this, why do we stop at
just seems to be something that happens
to middle-aged women, right? it that
that's written in the orthopedic
literature seems to happen to
middle-aged. Where's the curiosity?
>> Where was it?
>> Yeah. Well, in X-fist text, you always
had the representative of him or they
and the vuvius man and all the angles of
the male body, but there was never
representation of women. The only time
you heard about a female athlete was all
the pathophysiology. You know, the iron
deficiency, the female athlete triad,
which we now call um relative energy
deficiency in sport.
>> And when you're looking at the
historical idea of sport, the only way
women were actually included and
accepted is when they were amenic
because then they were quote more like
men and then there wasn't a problem with
training them and then they could work
as hard. But we know that that's not
appropriate. That's a sign of of illness
and overtraining under recovery. So, it
is pervasive everywhere. It's not just
the medical, but it goes into when you
think about what it means to be
successful in sport. It's the power.
It's the aggression. It's the
unfallibility of being human. And a
woman having a menstrual cycle was
deemed a fallibility. So, they're trying
to push it aside. This is so systemic
though that women downplay their own
complaints. They gaslight themselves. It
takes them a long time to seek care
because they're afraid of the response.
They are not always honest with what's
going on in their body. I'll say, "Do
you have pain?" "Oh, no more than
regular." They downplay everything. You
have to really ask. And it's almost the
society, I don't want to be viewed as
this way. I don't want to be not taken
seriously. And it causes them an to have
an even harder time to get to a
diagnosis because they don't feel
comfortable sharing some of these
symptoms or they've downplayed them in
their life so much. This is why they
have to get so sick to often present to
even try to get care. And they come to
me almost to a woman after I'm talking
about whatever muscularkeeletal thing
they'll say even before they want to
describe it to me. They'll say, "But you
know, I have a really high pain
tolerance." Yes. Mhm.
>> Like it's a badge because we've been
conditioned to not come for any pain.
But I've suffered. I've tried. That's
why your arm doesn't move anymore. I've
got such a high pain tolerance, but I
couldn't take it anymore. I didn't want
to come. And I feel like why does it
have to be that way?
>> So, you train treating both males and
females. I I was locked in a room with
women for 25 years, you know, and so
it's so fascinating to me to hear how
men and women come in with the same
complaint in your clinic, in your
fellowship, all those years you spent
training, and yet you were taught to
treat them differently, you know, and
the urologists say the same thing, you
know, who
>> I don't think I was aware of it.
>> Yeah.
>> There was just that's
so much bias. Yeah.
>> I didn't realize. I didn't either
>> because like you, until I went through
my own pmenopause,
I might not have paid it attention to
it.
>> Yeah,
>> I may have been less sensitive.
>> I was a terrible menopause.
>> I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because it's strange
where you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you. Is that in part because we know
very little about hormones as well. When
I was speaking to our audience, we asked
a thousand women to submit their
questions ahead of this conversation.
And one of the most asked questions, all
the most asked questions sort of related
to understanding hormones. I think the
conversation around hormones is quite a
new one in society and I actually think
it's been driven a lot by a heightened
understanding of menopause generally. I
think the the conversation of hormones
around outside of fertility and the
general menstrual cycle. I can right now
draw from memory the exactly what's
going to happen in a normal menstrual
cycle. We were taught that, you know,
very very well. But when I saw maybe 3
years ago an academic paper that showed
all of the locations of the G-coupled
estrogen receptors in the human body,
>> what's that?
>> I lost my mind. So basically, where are
the estrogen receptors in the human
body? And they're everywhere. The brain,
the bones, the muscle, the gut, you
know, the the every almost nothing. The
the the endothelial, the lining of the
individual blood vessels around our
heart, you know, it's really radical to
me to think about how all these sex
hormones are the progesterone, estrogen,
testosterone, hormones are everywhere.
>> What is a hormone?
>> They're not actually sex hormones.
hormones are your body's communication
system, right? So, it is really how your
body is sending out messengers to
communicate. So, a hormone is dictating
an action and I think there's going to
be a lot of great discussion. But one
thing that I think is very important to
your point, Stephen, is even things that
we were readily taught about the
menstrual cycle and estrogen,
progesterone, testosterone, the public
is now becoming aware of because we've
not done a good job at public education
that this is what's really happening in
your body. this is what your menstrual
cycle is. This is what happens when you
go through menopause. This is what
happens when you're trying to train for
a sport. We haven't had these
discussions publicly that we are seeing.
And I think that is highlighting
interest in all of this even if some of
us were taught some of this. But when it
comes to hormones there, everybody wants
really easy fast. Draw my level. Tell me
what to do. Give me a medicine. Fix it.
And I think the most important thing to
understand is that by definition, your
hormones are dynamic. Your body is
responding to the hormonal signal it
sees and determining what next signal to
send out. So constant fluctuation
throughout the day in response to
multiple stimuli. And that's how it's
supposed to be. If we didn't do that,
we'd all be dead.
>> It's a symphony. But that makes it
really hard for somebody to understand
on the other end who's not in medicine
who says, "Well, is it my hormones?"
Because there's no one test that's going
to give you one answer. You have to
really interpret it in context of the
full body. And it makes it really hard
for practitioners who do not understand
the hormones as well. And we see a lot
of mismanagement of hormonal scenarios
and situations right now that are
actually detrimental to patients. So,
I'm glad you're having this discussion
because that's not a stupid question.
What is a hormone? Many people don't
really understand that.
>> What is the I really want to make sure
that if someone for both the men that
probably have less understanding but
also from our conversations I've
realized and the feedback I've gotten a
lot of women don't understand their own
hormones and their own menstrual cycles.
What is the most basic level that we
have to start at to give people an
understanding that we can then build on
of what's going on here?
>> I was say I want to get rid of this
graph.
>> Okay. So that leave it out. Leave it
out. But it it shows just a textbook of
what a menstrual cycle is is, but it
doesn't show the daily perturbations of
estrogen and the luteinizing hormone
pulses and all the things that go as
Natalie is saying to make it to make it
work.
>> You see two organs there, the ovary and
the endometrial lining. You're not
seeing the muscle, the bone, the brain.
All of those organs are affected by
these normal monthly fluctuations.
>> Yeah. And the conversation that we're
having now in research methodology is
the fact that there is no real
definition of normal cuz every woman's
cycle is variable. So when we look at
this, everyone thinks that this is
normal but we don't actually know if
that is for the fact that a woman's
variation
this can change cycle to cycle. This can
change cycle to cycle. Sometimes we have
an ovulatory cycles. So until a woman
can identify what her own normal is, we
can't rely on this graph to actually
explain to them.
>> How does a woman know what their normal
is versus, you know, because a lot of
women are on birth control pills since a
very young age. So I think my partner
Melanie, she's she was on birth control
for about a decade. So she like didn't
have her cycle and then it came back and
it was every I don't know 60 90 days.
>> Mhm.
>> And then she changed her diet a little
bit and it kind of went down to 30 days
over time. But I don't think she knew
what normal was. Is there such thing as
normal?
>> I mean there is what should be normal
for you. So you should have a regular
predictable period which means that you
are having a menstrual bleed at a
predictable interval. It can range
person to person but for you really it
should be within a couple days
monthtomonth. I always tell patients I
should be able to give you a calendar.
You should be able to take your finger
pick when your next period is coming and
within a few days be accurate. Now
usually that range is somewhere between
25 and 35 days for the average person.
when it starts to get shorter or longer,
it can be a warning sign that something
is going on. When it comes to the
menstrual cycle, because I think we're
going to talk about these hormones
really well, and I talk about this every
day, let's give a one minute
explanation. If we think about to
Stacy's point from the brain, the brain
is sending out pulses of hormones, but
FSH drives egg growth. It's called
follicle stimulating hormone, and each
egg is inside a follicle. So, you have a
group of follicles inside the ovary. FSH
comes from the brain, grabs one of them
and gets it to grow and it makes
estrogen and this estrogen from the
ovary as the egg is growing is called
estradiol and it's the primary type of
estrogen in your body. So it is rising
and when it gets to a peak level and the
body is so fascinating because it's 200
pogs for 50 hours is a very exact
amount. Then the brain says we must have
a mature egg and it kicks out a surge of
luteinizing hormone or LH and that is
going to allow the follicle to rupture
the egg to be released and the follicle
to reform and then become a corpus
ludium and then the brain's going to
send out pulses of LH giving you pulses
of progesterone. So Stacy's point
>> that's an average and those numbers on
the little graph are nowhere near
accurate because progesterone goes up
and down the entire second half of the
cycle known as the ludial phase. What's
progesterone?
>> Progesterone is also made from the
ovary. So, the two main hormones when it
comes to a premenopausal female are
going to be estrogen and progesterone.
Progesterone is the progesterational
hormone or progreg. It is going to
change the endometrial lining and it is
essential to get pregnant. It opens and
closes the implantation window within
the uterus and it completely changes the
physiology of your body. And we're going
to talk a lot that is why in the ludal
phase your body works differently when
you have progesterone
>> and the lutial phases
>> after ovulation when you have a corpus
ludium. So when LH is coming from the
brain you have a corpus ludium it makes
progesterone. This is the second half of
the cycle known as the ludal phase. The
first half when you have estrogen only
is the follicular phase. So you have an
estrogen dominant phase and then you
have a phase where you have both
estrogen and progesterone. And your body
is made Yes. So we have our estrogen
dominant phase, the follicular phase,
and then we have we have both estrogen
and progesterone here in the ludial
phase. And your body is made to function
differently in these because in the
progesterone side, it's preparing you
for a pregnancy. It thinks every month
you might get pregnant and it starts to
change how your body's going to work on
a cellular level. But if you don't get
pregnant, that progesterone level is
going to drop and the cycle starts back
over.
>> And from um like a exercise and sports
>> Yeah. point of view. When we get into
this, the progesterone's job is to build
this lush endometrial lining and it
creates a lot of glycogen storage. So,
we often hear about glycogen in the
muscle and that's what we're using for
fuel. It has a way of shuttling a lot of
the carbohydrate away and storing it
into the endometrial lining, which is
why we see differences in intensity and
the way that a woman can respond to
exercise if she has ovulated. So is this
in preparation of a potential baby?
>> Yeah, correct. Yeah. In the second half
of the cycle, your core body temperature
increases, your resting heart rate is
higher, your heart rate variability is
lower, you have increase in fatigue, you
have an increased appetite, your body is
shifting function in case an embryo
comes in so that it can start to divert
energy and change what it is doing right
down to your immune system changes.
>> And that's roughly from day 14 roughly.
>> Roughly. Yeah. Yeah. At ovulation, it's
about 3 days after whatever day. If
you'd like to be specific, it's about 3
days after ovulation until when you get
your next period.
>> Yeah.
>> You all talk about how our menstrual
cycles can be a broader sign of whole
body health.
>> Mhm.
>> And um so should if someone's menstrual
cycle is irregular, should they be
concerned?
>> Yes.
>> I thought you were going to say no.
>> How irregular? What's like if I'm not
getting my menstrual cycle?
>> Absolutely not good. You should go see a
doctor. Yeah, if your cycle is
irregular, if the calendar trick, you're
putting your finger and it's nowhere
near when your cycle's coming. Or I have
women who say, "Oh, there's no way I
could predict it." Or, "I know it will
come, but it'll come every 4 to 6
weeks." Your body's meant to work like
clockwork when it comes to your your
hormones and your menstrual cycle. And
yes, you can always have one abnormal
month, always. But when you consistently
are having irregularity, that is a sign
that something else is going on. It's
one of the biggest red flags that we
have for early hormonal health or
systemic problems. But to your earlier
point, Stephen, we have a generation of
women on contraceptive options who are
not tracking their cycles. We have women
who are not taught how to track their
cycles. They don't know when ovulation
occurs. They don't know how long their
ludal phase is. If I say the first sign
of ovulatory dysfunction or having a
problem with your cycle is a short ludal
phase, well, you only know that if
you're tracking when ovulation occurs
because otherwise you could still have a
regular cycle, but you don't know that
something's abnormal.
>> And that lut your phase again is the
last the last half of your your cycle.
>> Exactly. But I think that the
conversation that's happening now is so
not just at this table but in society
that our monthly cycle is so much more
than getting ready to have a baby
because I think that none of us knew
this.
>> No.
>> Because at 17 I wasn't that interested
in having a baby. So it didn't occur to
me that I should care.
>> Right.
>> Right. And it's the only time if you're
thinking about it in that way that
you're worried about your period is if
you don't have one and pregnancy, right?
And so if we're shifting the
conversation to this is physiology, this
is has to do with every part of female
physiology,
maybe it will be easier for people to
know,
right?
>> Yeah. I often put it with u my athletes
that it's a marker of health that if you
are able to take on the load of
training, the load of travel and
maintain your normal menstrual cycle,
then you are robust enough to be able to
progress. But if there becomes a misstep
in your menstrual cycle, then we need to
look at all the stressors that are and
the allosic load and pull you back and
see what do we need to address? Do you
need to eat more? Do you need to recover
more? what are the things that are
missing to bring you back to normal?
>> I was diagnosed with polycystic ovarian
syndrome in medical school and so like
every medical student of course it was
like gloom and doom and I you know
thought I had the most extreme case ever
known to mankind. It was really just
garden variety PCOS and I had very
serious boyfriend quickly engaged you
know looking forward to having a family
with him starting a family with him and
the terror around my infertility and
what the impact was. What was never
taught to me and what I didn't
understand until much later was the
metabolic impact. Like PCOS is a
symptom. There's nothing wrong with my
ovaries. They're just responding to this
high insulin level I was born with. And
no one really sat me down and talked to
me about my first research project was
women with irregular periods and the
risk of developing gestational diabetes
and and you know I didn't even know what
insulin resistance was at the time. And
now we're coming to understand that, you
know, when these young women are coming,
you know, I only do menopause now, but
before I left that practice, you know,
when women were coming with the regular
cycles and we were making these
diagnosis, immediately I was launching
into the discussion about her metabolic
health long term and what this, you
know, it's a gift to know this. So now
we can start making interventions,
nutrition, diet, exercise to give you a
better system to deal with this thing
that you were born with and her
fertility. Of course,
>> a huge amount of women have PCOS and I
think that's one of the leading one of
the leading one of the top causes of
having irregular menstrual cycles. You
you mentioned insulin resistance and
metabolic dysfunction there. And you
said something like diabet gestational
diabetes,
>> diabetes in pregnancy. So someone who
was non-diabetic before pregnancy and
then develops diabetes. So her blood
sugars have now reached a threshold
where they are higher than normal and
can cause you know problems for her
pregnancy and herself long term. And up
to 50% of those patients de who develop
diabetes in pregnancy will develop type
2 diabetes within 10 to 15 years after
that gestation after being pregnant. And
so what we know now is like we have
warning signs of this well before
pregnancy where we can set these women
up for success. Before it's just we wait
till we make the diagnosis, everybody
gets their glucose test and off you go.
But now with this PCOS diagnosis, we are
monitoring earlier. We're starting her
on the nutrition. You know, we're
treating her like a diabetic with
nutrition and exercise recommendations
rather than waiting till she she reaches
the criteria. Stephen, having
infertility, this is a scary statistic.
It predisposes you to many medical
problems later in life, including an 80%
higher chance of having a heart attack,
75% higher chance having metabolic
syndrome, higher risk of cancer, and
early death. Why infertility? Well, it's
not exactly that infertility is causing
this, but it's that for many women,
we'll use Dr. Haver's example, you're
healthy until you get this diagnosis.
It's one of the first warning signs your
body's giving you that there might be
inflammation and insulin resistance or
something impacting your hormones, your
menstrual cycle, your ability to
conceive that if it is not corrected now
is setting you up for many problems down
the road. PCOS is a example of this
because in PCOS you have a lot of eggs
inside the ovary. It's actually
something that genetically runs in
families. likely there's something that
happens when you're a baby inside your
mom that predisposes your ovary to not
lose as many eggs as it should and it
changes how they respond to insulin. So
what happens is you end up having more
eggs on an average. Your brain doesn't
know this and sends out the average
signals but that gets diluted amongst
all the eggs and so you're not getting
into these ovulatory stages of Stacy's
favorite graph here. Well, what happens
from there is that you're actually in a
relatively lower in estrogen phase than
you should be. You never see the
progesterone. And what happens is you
start to completely shift. The ovary
itself actually becomes insulin
resistant. And what this means is that
throughout your entire body, you start
to develop high glucose, which is the
blood, right? That's your blood sugar.
Your blood sugar is the fuel for all
your cells. All your cells need glucose.
Well, insulin is the hormone that helps
that glucose go from the bloodstream
into your cells. Well, in insulin
resistance, when your body sees high
glucose all the time, it starts to send
out more insulin saying, "Hey, we need
to get this into cells, but the cells
start to, oh, I'm used to insulin being
here, so I'm not going to respond." It's
going to take a higher insulin signal to
get the cell to open up the door and let
glucose comes in. This becomes very
problematic especially in we'll say PCOS
because that insulin is very
inflammatory causes you to get extra fat
stored in different places. It also just
completely changes how your body your
metabolic health in general but also
your hormonal health and in your brain
because your brain sees this and says
why are we keeping glucose in our in our
bloodstream is what's going on heightens
everything. And so this resistance to
insulin actually shifts how your brain's
going to respond to hormones, therefore
the hormones it's sending out. And it's
a self-perpetuating cycle. And a lot of
when we talk about lifestyle mechanisms
to improve hormonal health, which I know
that we all will, a lot of that is
targeting improving insulin resistance
and combating inflammation because those
two players, a lot of it is controlled
by the world around us and what we do to
some degree. And especially if you have
an underlying diagnosis like PCOS,
>> endometriosis, which is a chronic
inflammatory disease, autoimmune
disease, you're at even higher risk. I
always say your scale is already tipped
in a way that's going to be really hard
for you. You have to make active steps
to fight what is happening inside your
body.
>> We'll talk about some of the ways one
can reverse their PCOS, if that's even a
possibility. Um, but again on the causal
factors, is it something So my
girlfriend's got PCOS. She's been very
public about that. Um, is it something
she did? Is it something she ate? Is it
>> She was Is this the way she was born?
So, she was born with a predisposition
of having too many eggs. You lose most
of the eggs inside your body when you're
a baby inside your mother's womb. You
lose the next biggest set before you
ever have your first period. Now, if you
don't lose them for some reason, you're
born with more and it interferes with
how your hormones are supposed to
communicate leading to this metabolic
issue and this insulin resistance. She
did nothing to cause this. Nobody with
PCOS caused it. However, what you said
earlier, oh, she changed how she ate and
her cycles got more regular.
>> You can influence the severity of the
symptoms that you experience with it. So
even if you don't cause your disease cuz
you did not,
>> choices you make can make it absolutely
can make it better or worse, just like
any disease.
>> And when you use the word insulin, I I
think of or insulin resistance, I think
of sugar.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah. Because glucose is sugar
essentially. And many people, and I'll
have patients tell me this, I don't need
to worry about insulin resistance
because I don't have diabetes or it's
not in my family. And we've so we've
ingrained this word insulin resistance
or talking about glucose or checking
glucose with a diabetic or pre-diabetic
state. But the world around us honestly
promotes insulin resistance. It's it
that's how our bodies we live in this
obesogenic environment. I mean there's
no doubt at least in the US you know and
most industrialized nations our
environment is what we call obesogenic
insulin you know and insulin resistant
so it you have to fight against kind of
the systems that are in place now for
most of us unless we have some genetic
predisposition to just be you know
magical um to because the way we process
food the way food is delivered to
communities the way you know our lack of
exercise you know everyone's working
from home now just just modern life is
is really you have to fight against.
>> One of the questions that came in from
the audience was I would like to know
how best to manage my PCOS.
>> When it comes to managing your PCOS,
targeting those two factors that we
talked about earlier, insulin resistance
and inflammation are really the key. And
I'll let these two speak to a little bit
of some of the exercise changes that we
can try to impact. But what I'll say is
that the best way to decrease
inflammation in your body is going to be
to start by focusing on your gut. Your
gut health controls a lot of the
inflammatory burden that your body sees.
The foods you choose to eat, they can be
both helpful if they have a lot of fiber
in them. They can feed your gut
microbiome, which is important in
estrogen metabolism, but they can also
be very harmful if they are
ultrarocessed foods that are even
causing more inflammation, not feeding
your gut microbiome at all and
worsening. So, I always say it's like a
scale. If you think every little food I
eat, it can make my insulin or it can
make my inflammation better, it can make
it worse. And so how we structure the
food that we put in our body is one of
the biggest changes the majority of
people can make that is going to make a
difference. And that's going to be a
very plantforward diet. Doesn't mean
it's plant only, but plants have fiber.
Fruits and vegetables have fiber. So we
have to make sure we're getting fiber as
a big change. That's what we see. I see
a lot of patients with PCOS specifically
being told I shouldn't eat fruit. I
shouldn't do this. I I need to avoid
>> do the ketogenic. You need to do keto.
Yes. So, we see people avoiding certain
food groups. And I always say it's not a
really sexy diet, but it's a it's a diet
we all know.
>> Lots of whole foods, fruits and
vegetables, healthy fats, healthy
sources of protein, avoiding the
ultrarocessed foods. That's going to be
probably the biggest change most people
can make. In addition to foundational
changes of your day, which is going to
be sleep more, that is when your body
fights inflammation, fights insulin
resistance. work on decreasing chronic
stress. To Stacy's point, you're not
running from the bear. So, your body is
not using that challenge, but you get a
email. You get stressed and your body
releases a lot of glucose so it can have
sugar and fuel to run from a bear and
there's no bear, right? And previous
days that would happen and then you'd go
run and that glucose would go into all
of your muscles and your body would go
back to normal. But now, we're
chronically stressed. So, actively
decreasing stress and then exercise,
building and using skeletal muscle is
one of the most effective ways to combat
insulin resistance that exists. And
since 80% of patients with PCOS have
insulin resistance, a large portion of
women with infertility, even without
PCOS, have insulin resistance, that is a
huge thing that people are missing,
especially when it comes to the exercise
discussion. And I know you guys probably
have things to add on that one. No, but
based on what you just I just took a
phone call this morning from a patient
when and it's just such a typical
conversation. She doesn't like the way
her body looks.
>> Her solution is not to eat. It's this
happens almost every day when I'm
talking to people. It's we're having
coffee for breakfast. We don't eat till
midday when we do eat. So the the gut
reaction because of the way many women
are raised is that we're going to starve
ourselves which is the opposite of good
when it comes to physiologic wholeness
and then you don't have the energy to do
the kind of exercise you need or on the
other side the response is I am going to
work so hard every single day that you
actually increase your stress there is
over there is overtraining
>> so you're just getting behind the
eightball with starving yourself and
overtraining. None of which are going to
solve either the core problem due to
PCOS or the core problem in any stage of
a woman's life. Right.
>> And this is where we look at the
socioultural effect of what a woman is
supposed to look like.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's the thing that I really
pushing out. It's like we want to think
about how strong we can be and how much
muscle we can build because muscle is a
massive metabolic help. Mhm.
>> And as as well as bone, right? So, we
talk about it and then when I get the
push back of, oh, I'm going to do fasted
training or I'm going to fast till noon.
I'm like, wait a second. Not only were
we going to interfere with our circadian
rhythm and our hormone pulses, we're
also acutely interfering with our
appetite hormones because if we're
looking at gerolin, which is our active
form of of our appetite, makes us
hungry. It's elevated with cortisol. And
so if we're thinking about that
elevation and we're not doing anything
to drop it and tell our body we have
food, then it goes in and directly
affects our neuropeptides, which then
affects our hormone, our hormone pulses.
So when a woman's like, I'm just having
coffee for breakfast and I'm going to
hold my fast. It's like, okay, well,
here we go. Cortisol is going up. As
Gary, you're going to get hungrier. Then
you're going to learn not to respond to
that hunger. You're going to hold your
fast. And we see from the research that
women who do that end up craving more
simple carbohydrates in the afternoon
moving incidentally less and
contributing to poor sleep because
they've now phase shifted. So when we're
talking about sleep and how important
sleep is, we also have to think about
the circadian rhythm and how it is
affected by food intake, light,
darkness, and all of the things. And we
need women to understand we want to
build muscle. We want to sleep well and
that requires food. Well, and it this
goes back this whole thing you just said
goes back to very early in this
conversation where I was talking about
sometimes we like to focus on the bright
shiny gadgets
>> when we haven't taken our health from
fine to optimize because everything you
just talked about
>> it isn't a gadget it's basic lifestyle
>> in the medical model of PCOS when I'm
talking about what we're taught and how
we train our clinicians.
We go into the, you know, we we aren't
taught a lot about disease prevention or
and I hate to use the term root cause
because I think it's been usurped by
certain members of, you know, the
wellness community.
>> Take it back.
>> Yeah, we're going to take it back. And
so, especially for PCOS, I was taught to
give a patient birth control pills or
Clomid when she's ready to get pregnant.
And so nothing nothing around nutrition,
exercise, lowering inflammation and I
was a program director until 2018 and
there was nothing in the curriculum
around this which affects at least 10%
of women probably more this condition
that how important lifestyle is. You
know, she went on for 10 minutes about
all the lifestyle change, which is
amazing.
>> Which is amazing.
>> But but patients,
>> but I'm sitting there thinking birth
control pills, birth control pills. I
mean, that was a knee-jerk reaction. I
mean, I was treated for my own
polycystic ovarian syndrome for 20 years
with oral contraceptive agents. And I
learned online through chat rooms about
the nutrition end of it.
>> Yeah. when I have athletes because we
see a higher percentage of PCOS in
successful female athletes.
>> Why
>> like what do I do? And it's looking at
what kind of training they're doing. So,
we're putting this more short, sharp,
high intensity to get that post exercise
response of anti-inflammatory,
growth hormone response, all of these
things that then bring down total body
inflammation. And then we're very
careful about food intake and when we're
doing it and what kinds of food so that
they don't have to go down the route of
oral contraceptive pills because that to
them has an effect on their performance.
When we're talking about the top end and
when we bring it back down into
recreational female athletes, we can do
the same thing. It's just we have to
educate and say these are our lifestyle
choices and then these are our medical
choices and what's optimal for your life
at this point. Mhm.
>> It's important to say at this table, and
we all talked about it last night, you
need to have a period if you're not
preventing a period with hormonal
contraception and you're in your
reproductive years. Because very often
women with PCOS or hypothalamic
amenorhea will say, I don't have a
period, but I didn't really like that
anyway, so it doesn't bother me, right?
How many women have said, well, I didn't
get my period for a year, but that was
fine by me. But that's not fine by your
body. That is hypoestrogenic time. It is
low estrogen.
>> Yeah. Very low estrogen. It's bad for
your body on so many reasons to be low
estrogen during these crucial bone
building years. But for we're talking
about how your hormones communicate
back. It's very harmful to long-term
health to have low estrogen
at all.
>> Brain health.
>> But yeah, but especially in young years
when you're still developing.
>> Why would a woman say that she didn't
want to have her period? I mean, this is
a super naive question as a guy, but I
understand it's painful.
>> I mean, do you want to bleed from
>> Do you want that?
>> I mean, if it was a choice now,
>> actually knowing now what I know now
>> and for my own young daughters, I'm
like, we have got to make sure you have
a period. But when I was young, I was a
dancer and an athlete. I had very low
body fat and I wouldn't have periods for
6 to9 months. And I'm like, yes.
>> Do you know what's interesting? I was
thinking of Mel.
She because of what she's been through
and also because she's listened to the
conversations I've had with all of you
and she understands the value and
importance of her period, she now
celebrates it. It's like a celebration
in our house when it arrives because
>> because if you understand the importance
that it has in sort of full body health
and the role it's playing, then the
pain, the downside
>> is weighted against your understanding
of the upside, which to her means she's
healthy, she's fat,
>> hormonal health is working, things are
great. And that's the conversation shift
that I'm hoping is gonna instead of
being a detriment and a downer and
talked about she must be on whatever
derogatory yes derogatory things are
said about us that oh my gosh she is so
healthy.
>> Yeah. I remember sitting in a high
performance meeting just maybe three
years ago and the leading athletics
coach stood up and said I know when my
athletes are ready to perform on the
world stage when their periods stop. And
all of us went what?
It's like no, that's the time where like
we have to really look at your athlete
is getting ready to crack and be
injured.
>> And it's still this pervasive idea and
it's still pervasive even in the fitness
industry that losing your period is okay
cuz that means you're training harder.
>> They actually are very resistant to
getting it back.
>> Yes. Like it's a sign of failure of
their sport or their athletic endeavor
because this is is so pervasive. And I
think that's why it's important to have
these discussions. And I love hearing
that Mel now says, "Yay, my period is
here." Because that's a sign of hormonal
health and things are working well
because that is how we should feel. But
I think the other part of it is for
women who have mayoria or heavy bleeding
and heavy cramping. They don't realize
that they can get help with that as
well. Mhm.
>> And that's a conversation that isn't
followed through when we're like, "Yes,
get your period, but if you're someone
who suffers from really bad cramps, we
also have to educate that there are
things that we can do to help with that.
>> Does the size of the bleed matter?"
Because she turned around to me the
other day and she said with her last
cycle, she said that she didn't bleed
much and she seemed slightly concerned.
Obviously, I had no idea what to say to
that.
>> It depends.
>> Congratulations. Well done. I'm so
sorry. minora. So we have definitions
and there are you know we don't walk
around with measuring cups generally
between our legs to measure how much
blood's coming out each month. But
>> but women know
>> but women know your period should not
cause you with modern you know period
products your cycle shouldn't cause you
any stress in your life. You should just
roll with it, right? And so that's when
I'm like when is it a problem?
>> Shouldn't bleed through your clothes.
>> You should be able to sleep through the
night. You should be able to get through
an athletic performance. You should be
able to do X, Y, and Z. Now when we do
start measuring and you should not be
anemic. So I'm not waiting till anemia.
I am anemia is low red blood cell count
you know to the point where your
performance is affected. Your ability to
carry oxygen is effective. So the red
blood cells are what carries oxygen in
our bodies. And women who have heavy
periods however that's defined can lead
to anemia. But the first thing that we
notice is their feritin is dropping.
That's the first sign my do my daughter
we just had some blood work done. She
was feeling a little fatigued and her
ferotin and iron saturations were really
low and I was like talk to me about your
period. Turns out she's not eating a lot
of iron rich foods. So we're dealing
with that. But you know we can get so
far ahead of this and looking at these
ferotin levels the transfer you know
these iron studies before she's actually
anemic which is like the last thing that
happens when her red blood cell count
drops or they become so small and what
we call microitic. you know, we are we
need to do a better job at recognizing
these things. We're not going to walk
around and measure how much blood's
coming out because I could maybe squeak
out 200 cc's, you know, a period and you
could be 300 and we're both doing fine.
You know, we both have great. So, I
think it's really looking at, you know,
how much bleeding is too much. Now, how
little is too much? That that's probably
better in your
>> Yeah. Is any change from what you
consider normal? We would all say this
is a normal amount. So if it gets
heavier than that or less than that and
it stays that way, that is concerning.
You can always have a one-off. Estrogen
is the driver of growing the uterine
lining. So if you have a lighter bleed
one month, we are concerned that you did
not grow as thick of a lining. Your body
didn't see as much estrogen. Most the
time you ovulated earlier that cycle,
your cycle came a little bit sooner than
you're used to it coming, and it's not
quite a big deal. But this can be
concerning if we see consistently light
periods, especially if we have history
of progesterone contraception, which
progesterone thins out the lining and
estrogen grows it. So progesterone
actually stabilizes it, but for the sake
of the discussion, we'll say estrogen
grows it, progesterone thins it. When
you only see progesterone, like a
progesterone IUD, the progesterone shot,
even continuous birth control pills,
because they give you a type of
synthetic estrogen and progesterone
every day, your uterine lining gets
thinner and thinner and thinner. And so
we see it can take months to return to
normal after coming off of hormonal
contraception. You also can get damage
to the endometrial lining. There's stem
cells in the endometrium that regenerate
every month after you bleed. They
regenerate so that the next group can
grow in response to estrogen. And this
can get damaged from typically anything
inside the uterus. So most commonly this
is post birth, you know, a traumatic
birth, a retained placenta, a DNC
procedure, which is sometimes used after
birth or in a miscarriage or even IUDs
or intrauterine surgery. and it can form
scar tissue in the uterus that can cause
a light period. So if you said, "Oh, Mel
had a miscarriage and had this procedure
and now her periods are lighter." I'm
highly concerned.
>> Versus amen.
>> Yeah. So that is concerning for scar
tissue in the uterus.
>> Okay.
>> If you said, "Oh, she was on a birth
control pill for a while and now it's a
little bit lighter." I'm less concerned
that's probably going to get better. or
if this period came closer together
>> or if you traveled around the world
three times this last month or
>> so one one off is no big deal but a
change from your baseline can be
concerning in addition we should say
that that graph is beautiful but you
know your thyroid your pituitary gland
it makes prolactin prolactin also
changes the endometrium so there's
subtle signs of other hormonal issues
that your menstrual cycle is the first
warning sign that something is off
>> what about pain She 2 months ago she had
like excruciating pain that I've never
seen before during her menstrual cycle.
>> Well, it's not pleasant to have your
uterus contract and expel its contents
in any form.
>> But what if it's like way above the
norm?
>> One time way above the norm is probably
situational based on other things that
are contributing to inflammatory burden
or response. your body is also healing
from a the corpus ludium's a cyst on
your ovary that can also feel painful
and at the time of your period it is
also healing so there's multiple things
that can cause pain
to Vonda's point so many people say I
have a high pain tolerance this is okay
because we don't talk about our own pain
so I don't know if my pain is normal
compared to somebody else's your pain
should not keep you out of your
activities of daily living you shouldn't
call in sick to school call in sick to
work, cancel dinner plans with friends
consistently. Again, everybody can have
a one-off month where something is off.
But if this happens every month, oh,
it's my period. I'm going to cancel
that. That is a warning sign that
something else could be going on.
Endometriosis, adnomiiosis, and uterine
fibroids.
>> You mentioned the word iron a second
ago, Dr. Mary. What is iron got to do
with this? And what is iron? So iron is
an element that is in our diets and we
do tend to store quite a bit of iron in
our bodies and it's an essential when we
look at the structure of the red blood
cell and of hemoglobin specifically. So
hemoglobin is the actual molecule that
is inside of the red blood cell that
carries the oxygen. So iron is really
critical to the formation of healthy you
know iron carrying red blood cells and
we we store iron in our bodies and so
and a lot in the bone marrow and in and
it's stored in this particular molecule
called feritin. So when we're measuring
ferotin levels in the blood that is you
know the first sign that your iron
stores are getting low is when we see
these low feritin levels. Are women more
iron deficient than one would think?
Like is the general population iron
deficient or what do you tend to see
when you run lab tests?
>> A menstruating woman. Yes.
>> A menstruating woman is is often
iron deficient.
>> Yes. And I we I do see it in our post
post-menopausal patients as well. That's
usually nutritional and inflammation
related. So ferotin is also something
that will decrease in in times of
chronic inflammation. And so you're not
able to utilize the iron that's coming
in and store it because this
inflammatory state is kind of inhibiting
that. So in a menstruating patient, I'm
always thinking is she bleeding too much
the first time, you know, and is that
bleeding menstrual? Is it coming from
her rectum? Is it coming from her
gastrointestinal tract? You know, does
she have gastritis or, you know, we have
to go through the, you know, the
algorithm of why that might happen. In a
post-menopausal patient, we can remove
vaginal bleeding from the issue, you
know, uterine bleeding, a period, but
then now I'm looking at nutrition. And
I'm looking at exercise. I'm looking at
inflammation as causitive factors.
>> And the global pitch here is the World
Health Organization estimates that
roughly 30% of women aged 15 to 49
worldwide are anemic with iron
deficiency being the leading cause. And
in some reason regions of South Asia and
subsaharan Africa prevalence can be up
to 50% of women are anemic with iron
deficiency being the leading cause. H
>> you noticed the norms have changed.
>> So it depends on who you read.
>> Yeah. again, you know, when you're
looking at male male normative curves
versus what you know, we're we're tend
to accept lower levels for a female. But
now that we're looking at performance
and, you know, looking at other factors
besides just what is this feritin level,
>> um there's a lot great new research
coming out that we are looking at this
differently and that that we're in our
clinic, we are looking for 60 to 100 for
a feritin level to be considered
optimal. very different than, you know,
the baseline for, you know, keeping you
out of out of a hospital versus you
functioning at your absolute best.
>> Yeah. Because the norms that often get
measured for us
>> because they tripled, right? They were
15 and then they went up to to 40.
>> So now they're saying 20 and above is
normal. And when I look at a lot of
women who are sitting 20 to 30, they
can't get help.
>> They cannot get help. And it's like,
whoa, it was maybe four or five years
ago. If you were below 50, then we would
look to get help. But now with the norms
that have shifted with the sicker
population,
we can't get women help unless they are
below 20. So when we say normal, I think
this is important for everybody watching
or listening. Normal in medicine means
common,
>> not non-pathological,
>> okay?
>> Not bad, you know, doesn't mean it's not
bad. And so norms shifting meaning we're
getting sicker as a population and we're
willing to accept lower levels although
they're not optimal for health. The lab
reference range what they say when you
get your blood work drawn and you see
the reference range is based on
population averages. And so if the
population is more anemic this is going
to accept a lower levels being normal
even though they're by no means optimal.
And I think that's one thing we all talk
about is well how are you feeling your
symptomology? What do we see? And you
have to interpret blood work in context
of the whole person and what is
happening. And that is one issue we do
see with getting your own blood work
drawn or these online companies when
nobody's interpreting it or helping you
interpret it on the other end. You see
something that is in a normal range but
it's not at all optimal for you and it
could be the reason why insurance. Yeah,
exactly. I want to talk about
endometriosis. I we have a team member
who's been with the Davosio since the
very beginning called Liv.
>> Yes.
>> Are you familiar with Liv?
>> I am.
>> So at age 13, she had her first period
and she experienced agonizing pain with
heavy bleeding.
>> At age 14, she was put on the pill to
manage the symptoms. Between age 15 and
24, she continued to have severe stomach
pain which resulted in multiple A&E
visits. She was often dismissed as
having gastriisitis.
>> Mhm. And it led to having her appendix
removed.
>> Oh my god.
>> Why'd you say oh my god
>> can get surgery?
>> But she had major surgery and
>> um I' I've seen this course before and
it's it's devastating cuz she's going
years and years and years now of
>> Yeah. age 25 she came off the pill to
see how she felt without it but her
periods worsened and she fainted from
the pain. So she went to accident and
emergency. At age 26, she got an
ultrasound which suggested
endometriosis, but no NHS diagnosis was
given.
We ultimately had a conversation with
you on the podcast, Natalie, and she
felt very heard and she was actually
there. And so afterwards, Jamaima in the
team, who you you guys know, um told Liv
to come and speak to me. And Liv told me
after you left about um the symptoms,
did she speak directly to you at that
time? She did. Okay. So, she came and
she spoke to us about her endometriosis,
which is the first time I'd ever heard
of it. Um, and then we offered to help
support her privately so she could get
private support with it. Um, and she got
an MRI scan privately, which confirmed
stage 4 infiltrating endometriosis.
>> Oh gosh.
>> Liv then pushed um on with her NHS
appointments, the National Health
Service in the UK, but the pain was so
much that she took me up on my offer to
pay for it privately. So, we paid for it
privately. Uh, and the endometriosis by
that point had spread to her bowels and
pelvis. And I've got this picture of
this four cm cyst. If you're all
faint-hearted, I mean, I don't know
where we'll put this on the screen, but
this is from her operation.
>> Yeah. It's called an endometrioma. It's
huge.
>> For anyone that can't see, it kind of
looks like a tumor.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, next to her ovaries
>> and it had spread at that point to her
bow and pis pelvis. It had become about
4 cm big. Her ovaries were stuck
together and attached to her womb and
her bowels. She then needed to book an
appointment for surgery. And before the
surgery, because of the scale of her
endometriosis, she had her eggs frozen
to protect her future fertility, which I
guess came from your advice. This
process took her 7 years and she was in
pain for 17 years because she did not
get a diagnosis.
>> Her story is unfortunately not uncommon.
This is a very typical story for
somebody who suffers from endometriosis.
Endometriosis is an inflammatory
condition. And the way I like to explain
it is when your body responds abnormally
to a normal process. You have immune
dysfunction as well. So let's think of
it as an autoimmune disease and a
chronic inflammatory disease. When you
have your period, you bleed out
indometrial cells in your menstrual
blood. We're used to that. In everybody,
you also have some indometrial cells
that will escape out the fallopian
tubes. That's not a big deal. If you
take out somebody's appendix while
they're on their period, you'll actually
see menstrual blood in their abdominal
cavity. In the regular person without
endo, your body says, "Oh, she's just on
her period." In the person who has
endometriosis, this creates a huge
inflammatory response where your body
starts to attack indometrial cells and
you get these implants throughout the
what's called the peritineal cavity or
the abdominal cavity of indometriallike
tissue that gets worse every time your
body sees estrogen which because it's
feeding the endometrium just like it
would in the uterus and so it gets worse
over time. The more ovulatory cycles you
have the disease gets worse. It's so
inflammatory that it's not uncommon to
get extensive
organ scarring. You get anatomical
distortion. These are some of the
toughest surgical cases in addition to
managing lifelong health but also
fertility as well.
>> Just obliterate the anatomy like because
the infiltration you'll these implants
will start growing into other organs
because they'll find new blood supply.
They'll steal blood, you know, blood
supply from from the bowel from because
all of our pelvic organs are just
sitting there on top of each other, the
bladder, the bowel, the c, you know, and
so
>> it sounds like it's alive, like it's a
cancer or something.
>> Think of it like velcro is what I say
almost these little patches of velcro
and they just start sticking together.
And that's what inflammation and
scarring does throughout your whole
body. And what happens here is that
because the primary symptoms of
endometriosis is pain. So again, back to
women's pain being taken seriously.
>> That's one of the issues and why the
average time to diagnosis is 7 to 10
years. Truly 17 years in this case from
when she had pain.
>> But the other symptoms do include
sometimes also pain with intercourse.
Typically though, that is very hard to
ascertain from somebody, but it's
usually with certain positions. Deep
penetration tends to be what really
stimulates pain. But you also see a lot
of GI manifestations that we don't talk
about. So if I have somebody who has
painful periods and they say they have
irritable bowel syndrome or a lot of
vague GI complaints,
that is a really big red flag to me
because like you said, these little
indometrial implants on the bowel, the
intestine, this high inflammation that's
happening irritates your intestine and
you get this GI response as well. One of
the hardest things about indometriosis
is that it's a surgical diagnosis only.
To be honest, we can means
>> have to do surgery to fully see and
diagnose that you have this.
>> It's one of those no meat, no treat, you
know, in in in medicine where you can't
make the diagnosis until you have a
tissue sample. So meat means you go and
take a biopsy.
>> Okay. See? Okay.
>> So you can suspect it based on imaging.
We're not great at this. And Dr.
Crawford, why don't we have a cure?
>> Mhm. Well, because it hasn't been
studied is one of is the primary answer.
Uh the secondary answer is that often
the the goals are tough with endo
because if estrogen feeds it, we all are
going to sit at this table and talk
about how important estrogen is for your
body. And a a lot of the treatments that
exist for endometriosis take estrogen
away to try to not feed these lesions.
And that has a slew of other symptoms
and long-term health implications as
well. Truly, we don't even give women
options to try to feel better. They are
given birth control pills because, hey,
I'm going to stop the ovulatory cycle.
I'm going to you're going to have less
what we call unopposed estrogen days.
>> We do have symptomatic relief.
>> Yeah. But we have and that's going to
help hopefully with some of your
symptoms. And it can for some women. It
doesn't reverse disease. It doesn't cure
it. It doesn't make anything better, but
it can slow down the progression any of
these treatments that do halt the
ovulatory process, but it severely
impacts I mean beyond so many layers of
your your mental your emotional health,
your relationships, but your fertility.
Stage three or four disease, regardless
of your age, you're going to have a less
than a 20% chance of conceiving
naturally over the course of your life
if you have stage three or four disease.
Every stage is impactful to your
fertility because of the inflammation.
Once you have anatomical distortion, an
indometrium or cyst inside the ovary,
removing that cyst is going to decrease
your egg count. That that's going to
have a major implication on your
potential. That's why we froze eggs
before we to cyst out so that we could
get those eggs, at least some that we
could out of the body before we went and
did something that was going to destroy
part of the ovarian tissue. What you
said, Stephen, is it seems like
indometriosis is alive. And that's a
really great analogy because it does
just feed into tissue and it's highly
destructive and if it distorts the
anatomy, we need a healthy floppy
fallopian tube generally that can swing
around and pick up this egg that's
floating around our abdominal cavity for
and then you need a place for the egg
and sperm to meet which is generally a
healthy non-inflamed fallopian tube. So
they're also at increased risk for
infertility but ectopic pregnancies.
That's where I see them, you know, is
when I was a hospitalist is in the O,
you know, emerently from a ruptured
fallopian tube from this, you know, and
I go in and I'm making not only she's
lost a wanted pregnancy now I and I'm
making the diagnosis of indometriosis at
the same time and they are just
devastated. I just feel sitting here not
being anywhere within this field
thinking wait a minute because I was a
cancer nurse first right before I did
this wait a minute there's got to be a
cell surface marker that's unique to the
endometrium that we could make a
monoconal antibbody against
>> there's got to be a cell surface marker
and I will say that there are people now
doing lovely and wonderful research on a
cellular level of indometriosis trying
to look at the endometrium itself what
cell markers are similar in indometrial
implants
Can you diagnose this on an endometrial
biopsy in somebody?
>> We haven't seen it get to the point
where it needs to, but at least people
are paying attention. So, I do think we
might have emergent technology that will
change the course of this for people.
>> Right now, I think awareness is key. And
one thing I always say is that
especially as a teenager because women
adjust. You accommodate to the world
around you. That's one of the things
that I think makes women so resilient. I
mean, if you have pain every single
month of your life, you are going to
convince yourself this is normal for a
degree of time because what other option
do you have? Has to get so bad. But when
you're a teenager, you don't know that.
And so, if when you are a teen, you
would stay home from school, you would
not go to the football game or go out to
dinner with friends, that to me has is a
huge red flag. But it actually is a very
high predictive marker that you do have
indometriosis.
So pain out of proportion to being able
to complete your normal life as a
teenager is a really big warning flag. I
ask every patient about that when we
talk about their periods because 50% of
patients with unexplained infertility
have indometriosis.
It is so hard to diagnose and
underdiagnosed yet impactful to our
body.
>> 26 years old. The advice given to her by
the NHS was to go back on the pill to
solve for the the pains that she was
getting. We certainly have a lot of
dismissive doctors and people who don't
take pain seriously, but also a disease
that is underfunded and not researched.
We do have limited options for how you
can help somebody. And I think we have
to acknowledge that both things can be
right. Now, getting to the root cause of
your pain is always going to be really
important versus just saying here's a
birth control pill that should take care
of it. Some women with endometriosis
love being on the birth control pill.
does highly improve their symptom
profile and it's an important part of
their treatment regimen. Other women do
not find any benefit from it and it's
really important to have the discussion
especially with indometriosis in regards
to your family planning goals. Do you
want kids? When is that going to be?
What might this look like? Because we
know if you have a higher rate of
infertility, a higher rate of needing
IVF, do we need to intervene sooner? But
that's going to impact some of the
treatment options we're able to give you
because some of them do delay ovulation
from for a prolonged period of time.
>> What I find in the patients, you know,
when we made the diagnosis was they're
forced into making these kind of
life-changing decisions about around
their fertility and ability to conceive
before they were ever before their peers
were even thinking about it. It's pretty
devastating.
>> It is. We have some pilot data looking
at taking some of the nuances of
recovery and looking at how to dampen
inflammation. So we have some pilot data
that's showing when women do cold
exposure
>> that it dampens inflammation and
improves their symptomology. So I'm
always thinking on the outside like what
other things can we do to dampen
inflammation in a positive way to
improve symptomology.
>> How does that work? So, if we're
thinking about the responses to cold
exposure, and we're not talking about
ice, we're talking about cold water
exposure. It creates a cascade of immune
responses that kind of protects the
body. So, we're reducing inflammation,
we're improving parasympathetic, which
reduces stress. Mhm.
>> So, if we're timing it and they know
when their period is and they can go,
okay, well, for the next or the 10 to 14
days before my period starts, I'm going
to have 10 minutes of cold water
exposure. And over the course of 3 to 4
months, that immune response becomes
learned. So, it reduces symptomology.
So, it becomes one of the treatment
options that we have for some of our
athletes that have endo and interferes
with their training. Mhm.
>> So I mean the cold water exposure is
available there. So that's how we
started the pilot study.
>> Um trying someone wanted to do this at
home.
>> 10° C. So what is that about
>> 40? Yeah. It feels really cold but not
an ice bath.
>> Not an ice bath because ice is
>> Ice is not good for
>> Can you get that in the shower?
>> You you need to
>> This is like cold submersion.
>> Can you do that at a home tub just with
turning on the spigot?
>> You could if you get really cold. Yeah.
You might want to add a little bit of
ice and let it melt. Okay.
>> But um not ice baths that we see in all
the popular media because that is way
too cold for a woman's body. It does the
opposite. It's a severe stress and
causes a stress response rather than a
parasympathetic calming response that we
want.
>> Okay. Like Stacy said, decreasing
inflammation in an inflammatory disease
is key to controlling the factors you
can. And much like we talked about
inflammation and PCOS, we heard the same
word right here with endometriosis.
Chronic inflammatory diseases are the
number one thing that we see across the
board impacting the population but
especially women.
>> And so these same strategies to work on
decreasing your own inflammation
>> and for endo it's a little different
because you can target it for when you
expect to have that high inflammatory
burden. But that's really an important
part that we don't talk about. I don't
see that the NHS talked about an
anti-inflammatory diet or getting more
sleep or cold exposure.
>> Working in the sales team at a startup
can be a strange experience because one
month you're chasing leads like the
future of the business depends on it,
which often it does, and then the next
month you're buried in them. Pressure
builds up and eventually it starts
clouding your judgment. Then you end up
making a reactive decision instead of an
informed one. Our sponsor, Pipe Drive,
is the number one CRM tool for small to
medium businesses, made by salespeople
for salespeople. It helps you get
brutally clear on exactly where your
focus should be. It shows you what
opportunities have stalled and what is
worth your time and focus. And my team
have been using the new Pipe Drive
prospector tool, which uses AI to search
through over 400 million profiles to
find verified decision makers and shares
their contact information with you. So,
if you're interested in learning more,
head to piperive.com/ceeo
where you can get a 30-day free trial.
And that's just for my audience,
pipedive.com/ceo.
So, it's time to join the 100,000
companies that are already using
Piperive by going to piperive.com/ceo.
Now, on this point of birth control, one
of the questions that came in from the
audience was, "How terrible is birth
control to female hormones?"
The birth control pill shuts off the
brain's desire to send the signal to the
ovary to make hormones. So, it is
ethanol estradiol, a synthetic estrogen,
and a type of a synthetic progesterine
or progesterone. These work, the brain
thinks that you have estrogen and
progesterone present. As we said, that's
the ludial phase. And so, your brain
says we don't need an egg to grow.
>> Ovulation starts in the brain. Y, right?
>> So, no FSH comes out and you're not
going to get ovulation. So they're very
effective for prevention of ovulation
which is makes it a very effective
contraceptive option. But as far as hor
hormonal shifts, yeah, your brain's not
sending out FSH and LH. Your ovaries are
not going to be making estradiol or
progesterone
>> or testosterone.
>> True.
>> And so that is how they are sometimes
helpful if you have, you know, uh some
women get hemorrhagic cysts with
ovulation. every every time you ovulate,
you when you rupture that cyst, you get
a lot of bleeding. The birth control
pill can prevent ovulation, therefore
prevent some women from being in
terrible pain. If you have PCOS, they're
often handed out like candy. One reason
is because it will regulate your cycle
so that you don't have these prolonged
irregular periods, but also will
decrease testosterone levels, which is
sometimes a good side effect of the pill
for women who have PCOS,
>> back to a normal level.
>> Yeah. But if you don't have PCOS or the
regular person, a lot of times your
body's tissues are not responding to
synthetic estrogen and progesterone the
same way it does to natural. I think
that's a very important point. So my
niece who competes uh at a national
level and she's 14 started suffering
from as she was going through her
adolescence her acne got outrageous and
she's a 14-year-old girl 13. start at 12
and a half. And of course, you know, she
goes to the dermatologist and they're
trying some topicals. And then finally,
as you go down the algorithm for how we
treat acne, one of the off label uses is
birth control pills will lower the
testosterone. Their skin can clear up.
So, her father, a little concern, comes
to me. Um, her mom passed away. Her
stepmom had passed away. So, he didn't
have the mom in the house to, you know,
the immediate mom to talk to. And for
the first time, I immediately thought of
her athletic performance. Thank you, Dr.
Sims and I thought she wants to go to
the Olympics. There's no way I'm going
to let her testosterone levels drop.
Like, we're going to throw everything
topical at this. And we finally found
the right combination. Her skin looks
great and she's super happy. But like,
the next logical thing was to put this
14-year-old, you know, on a birth
control pill to get her acne under
control, which is the end result. But
what no one's thinking of is her
athletic performance. How is it going to
affect her
>> training years leading
>> and her training years? Like, this is
critical for her. 16 is when the next
trials are up for her. So that's 2 years
from now. So we were able to get her
acne under control, avoid the birth
control pill, but that was nothing I'd
ever thought of before.
>> Well, I'm sitting here from a
muscularkeeletal standpoint thinking
about the high percentage of women who
have endometriosis and PCOS and the
complete soundingly
imbalance of natural hormones. Plus,
for a lot of reasons now, girls are not
cycling normally.
>> Mhm.
>> And I'm sitting here terrified for their
bones.
>> Yep. 100%.
>> Because we build bone from 15 to 25.
And if we are so inflamed that we're
producing all kinds of inflammatory
cytoines IG interlucan 6 and uh C
reactive protein and tumor necrosis
factor which halt bone development we
don't have enough estrogen for whatever
reason we're going to shut off our
testosterone because it makes us feel
better
>> and we're not exercising
>> and we're sitting around.
No wonder I have 20 and 30 year olds
with no bone density that are then going
to go into pmenopause which we will get
to and lose another 20%.
>> So I was pretty feeling pretty hopeful
that the generation Xers are going to
get to the millennials and get to the
whatever they're called after that.
>> It is
>> we're gonna be you're gonna see it get
worse before it gets better. Exactly.
That's what I'm sitting here terrified
like. Okay. I thought, okay, baby
boomers, those women missed out. Xers,
we're doing the best we can.
Millennials, but no, cuz now you're
telling me our 15 to 25 year olds are
still in the same detriment with muscle
and bone building.
We are trying to change the narrative.
That's the group we're trying to target
right now. And I do think by educating
across the lifespan, we're going to
change how those of us who have 11 and
12 year olds what we recommend. I I
treat girls in their teen years when
they come to me without their period
much differently than a lot of other
people do. But this is learned
experience. Instead of just you don't
have a period, here's a birth control
pill. Say you're not making estrogen and
this is a crucial time for you. Let's
give you estrogen. Let's talk about why
you're not. what can we do to change it?
And so this discussion is more than just
disease state important like PCOS and
endometriosis. It's truly important
across the lifespan of a woman. The
choices that are being made in her early
reproductive timeline is going to impact
her longevity.
>> Can I ask all of you what you would have
done differently
>> for ourselves?
>> Yeah, for yourselves. Obviously, I know
several of you have daughters as well,
but what would you have done? I wish
everybody could see all of your faces.
>> Oh yeah, I've talked about this before.
I mean, I was amenoric until I was 20.
>> What's amenoric?
>> Didn't have periods.
>> Okay.
>> Because of high stress, high sport, you
know, didn't care, didn't eat well in
the whole um mindset of the, you know, '
90s of calories in, calories out. If
you're thinner, then you'll run better.
If you're running better, then you're
going to hit different metrics. cuz I
was a runner in high school and then
joined the crew team. Same thing. So, if
I could go back and talk to my younger
self, I would have been like, "You need
to eat, you need to recover, you need to
eat, you need to recover." Instead of
the mantra of calories in, calories out,
more cardio, lose weight, lose weight,
lose weight. Because now I educate
people is you want to take up space, you
want to be strong, you want to look at
um not the idea of losing something, but
gaining something, gaining that power,
gaining that strength, gaining that
bone, gaining that muscle, gaining your
period. Those are the things that I'm
trying to educate the younger generation
cuz that was not impressed upon me as a
younger athlete, which then had a lot of
repercussions later in life. Luckily, my
bone density is fine.
>> So,
>> were you on the contraceptive pill? No,
>> you might. Okay.
>> I was um not an athlete, so mere mortal.
And um
uh but it's so you've you've you've been
able to take that experience though and
apply what you've learned in this this
high int, you know, working with these
intense athletes to the to the regular,
you know, to people who don't exercise
at that level. And
you know, I completely fell under the
the expectation of the aesthetics of it.
>> When I did exercise, I exercised to look
a certain way. And then in my 30s, I
exercised for performance. I started
running half marathons. I was doing baby
triathlons, really short ones with my
girlfriends. It was a social thing and
it was super fun. You know, I was
running for time. Now I'm exercising for
my old lady body. Yep. You know, I'm
exercising to be in a bigger body cuz I
know my mother and my grandmother. So,
my grandmother spent the last 10 years
of her life in a bed incontinent with
dementia and completely frail.
And my mother is on the same course. My
mother is 88, fell and broke her hip in
January. She just now is walking on a
walk or she's in assisted living
facility for Alzheimer's.
I want to change that legacy for my
children. I don't want that to be my
path and I don't want my children to
have that to be an expectation.
So all of the things I would have done
differently was
I wanted to be thin. Thin was healthy.
That is what I learned in medical
school. The thinner you were up to
starvation, you know, up to you want the
lowest body mass index possible without
being a little bit too low, you know.
And I kind of skirted that line because
I stopped eating in medical school due
to stress. I would have fed myself. I
would have lifted weights. I would have
stopped doing so much cardio because
knowing I was chipping away at my bone
density. I was chipping away. I was
raising my inflammation levels. I was
chipping away at my ability to resist
the Alzheimer's, you know, and dementia
that runs in my family. And that's what
I'm trying to impress. My girls are 21
and 25. What I'm trying trying to
impress on them.
>> But that's the mentality that we grew up
in, right? When you're looking at the
supermodels of the '9s and Kate Moss and
it was all
>> heroin chic.
>> Yes, heroin chic, which is the worry now
with the GLP1s coming back and the
ballerina body and all the things that
we're seeing come back again.
>> And it's it is worrisome.
You know, when I think about I mean,
I've already told the world now about
having low body fat, maybe being POS and
not knowing it, not ever talking about
that, having no periods, but then so
there was that in my youth that that I
would have done better, but that it
didn't end in my youth. I mean, I went
to college, same. I went to grad school,
still same. I went to medical school and
in medical school and
four years of medical school, seven
years of residency and fellowship. Still
didn't eat, still wasn't having periods.
I didn't sleep for about 11 years,
whether between call every third night
and then I had a baby and then I was
awake for two years cuz she slept with
me. That's another discussion. But I
think of all these things that I wish I
knew then that I know now. I have the
same goal. I have four 30-year-old
daughters and I have a 17-year-old and
they are not going to be allowed to hit
a wall like some of us may because we
didn't know.
>> And were you on the birth control pill?
>> You know, intermittently. Uh probably
totally in my life about 10 years, but
um not continuously.
>> And Mary, I forgot to ask, were you on
the birth control? Yeah, you were off
and on for 20 years.
>> So, polycystic ovarian syndrome that was
the treatment. I mean, I learned about
nutrition kind of on the back end. But
the life that I had set up for myself
between, you know, medical school,
residency, and then going into the field
of OBGYn with limited sleep, you know,
working 100hour weeks there. I didn't
have a environment that would have been
conducive to be able to manage that
disease
with lifestyle
and I can look back and say that
honestly now
>> um
with without using the crutch of the
birth control pill to manage my
symptoms.
>> I was on the birth control pill for
probably 15 years continuously. And you
know, we have to give credit where
credit's due because I was able to
pursue medical training and not worry
about what family building looked like
for me, which was really important
because I was not ready to have a child.
So, anytime we frame a discussion around
birth control, I always want to say it's
not ever going to fit into one bucket of
all good or all bad. It's going to be,
you know, different stages of life,
different things are important. I didn't
stop it soon enough to learn to track my
cycle. I didn't recognize cycle
abnormalities when I had recurrent
miscarriages. I had a really hard time
knowing is this how my cycle's supposed
to be or not because I never had the
opportunity to just have periods and see
what is my normal. I stopped it and
started trying right away and got into a
cycle of having a pregnancy and that
would last for a while and then I would
lose it. So I really lost the
opportunity to say this is my baseline
and oh there might be a problem here or
to intervene. I wish id advocated more
when I had my own pregnancy losses. I
was told over and over, there's nothing
you can do. This is nothing. Just keep
trying. And even as somebody in the
field, that felt very dismissive and is
a fuel for a lot of what I do now. But
on a personal level, you know, 10 years
after having those pregnancy losses, I
was diagnosed with celiac disease
because I had osteopenia on a dexa scam.
>> And so I had
>> to explain what that is.
>> Yeah. So celiac disease is essentially
an allergic reaction to gluten. So when
I was taking gluten, which is in most of
your carbohydrates
or the good stuff like breads and
pastas, when I was eating those, it was
causing an inflammatory reaction inside
my body, making my gut unhealthy and
kind of creating a baseline level of,
let's say, chronic inflammation.
>> And recurrent pregnancy loss can be one
of the signs and symptoms of it in
addition to just some other what feel
like very generalized symptoms. fatigue,
low energy, headaches, GI distress,
>> WW.
>> Yeah, I was a whiny woman. And when some
of these symptoms finally got to a state
where they were getting worse, probably
with hormonal change with age, and my
doctor ordered a bone scan, and it came
back that I had osteopenia, which is
very low density of my bones for my age
>> and especially at the time, you know, no
known medical problems. And so luckily
had somebody who was very committed to
not labeling me a WW and saying I think
you're not absorbing something correctly
to get on this pathway to figure out
that because of this autoimmune disease
celiac disease I wasn't my gut was
inflamed. I wasn't be able to absorb the
nutrients that I needed.
>> But somebody had to be committed on the
other end because these symptoms went on
for so long. I just accepted them. I let
them be. But I also am scared because
those critical bone building years I was
on the
>> PEL
>> and I used it continuously which means
every single day all the time
>> I you know I know I was chronically
inflamed and so now I'm at a stage of my
life at 43 saying I've got to try to
catch up before it's too late and that
is scary
>> and can you catch up?
>> Yes. Yes, you can build bone. Um
>> because you know I see all these grass
wonder that
>> you know you kind of
>> yes
>> you go
>> curve but yeah and then it goes down
from your wherever you manage to get it
up to. So I'm telling all my friends at
the moment thanks to you I'm telling all
of them to get their muscle and their
bone as high as possible because it's
probably going to fall with age
naturally.
>> Well everyone
ages. Yeah. Age is the most natural
thing we do from the minute of our
birth. But men and women age at
different rates, especially
after pmenopause with the the lack of
estrogen, we rate we age very
differently from that point on. But your
point being made is can we please
maximize our bone density and our muscle
mass and everything else frankly
in our youth when we're probably not
aware, right? When we're in college and
doing all the things kids do, it's the
last thing on our mind. And yet it's the
most critical time because you want to
start both your bone and your muscle
from the highest possible level. Now,
can you through lifestyle and hormones
build bone again? Yes, actually you can.
But wouldn't it have been better to
start out with the maximum so that the
natural decline doesn't take you into
dangerous levels?
>> Right.
>> Mhm.
>> On that point of birth control, what are
you saying to your daughters that wasn't
said to you? Are you Because Mel
regrets, my girlfriend, she's very open.
She regrets being on the birth control
pill for 10 years because she had no
idea what it what it was doing to her
body. And then obviously when she came
off her cycle, I think she spent like
you, Natalie, 2 years trying to figure
out what was going on and she didn't
have her period for an extended period
of time after she came off. What are you
saying to your daughters about the birth
control pill that wasn't said to you?
Are you recommending them to use it how
you guys used it or
>> I mean, we were started on it so young.
I I do see a trend towards not starting
it as young as it was started in our
generation and I think that that is
important. I see, you know, personally,
my daughter is not quite at that stage
yet. So, we haven't had to make these
decisions as um they have had to, but I
do think it's cycle awareness is one of
the few early signs you have of your
body's health as a young woman. And so,
to purposefully never get to know what
that is, is a detriment to saying, "I'm
aware of what's healthy for me and I
know what's happening in my body." But
you guys have had these discussions at
different time periods. For my youngest
daughter,
we I was worried about uh she was a
dancer also. She was teeny tiny. So tiny
even though she had great muscle mass,
but she like me wasn't having periods.
And so the advice was to put her on
birth control to regulate periods. But I
was always uncomfortable with that
because she didn't to be a dancer. She
didn't have to be quite as tiny as she
was. And so what we have done now is
I've encouraged her to gain a little
weight and get a little bit more body
fat because I took her off of that. She
only had to gain 5 lbs. I think I said
to you, maybe seven and it has more
regulated her and she's having her own
periods now. And so I don't know what
she's going to decide. She's going to be
18 soon. And but I think what we should
be telling our daughters is all the
information so that they can make an
educated decision because I just did
what I was told
>> and I'm a doctor and I and but I'm not
an OB so I don't understand the nuances
of what the pill is that it's synthetic
that this is how it works this is what
it doesn't do. So I would want to give
my daughters all the information so that
they can make an educated decision.
>> So my oldest, the first one coming
through, uh wanted it for contraception.
And so when we talk about contraception,
it's not just most people automatically
think the oral birth control pill, but I
did go through all of the options with
her and then sent her to a trusted
friend um to let her go and make her own
decision. and she decided to have an an
IUD inserted, which I thought was a
great choice for her cuz she had normal
regular periods before we did this.
There were no issues. And she had it
inserted and then within a week she
started having severe cramping, called
me into the bathroom. And this is my
daughter who has not let me see her
unclothed since she was 7 years old.
She's just very private and she's like
writhing on the floor. Bless her little
heart. And she had expelled the IUD on
her own. She had cramped it out uterus
pushed it out of her body and it was
extraordinarily painful and so we
basically delivered the IUD on her
bathroom.
>> So do you know what an IUD is?
>> Is not the coil
>> is
>> that's one form of an IUD. She had a
different form but she basically pushed
out her own IUD her uterus
>> uterine device. So it's birth control
that is placed inside the uterus
>> and it's shaped like a tea.
>> It is shaped like a most is shaped like
a tea. the UK they use the coil still
quite a bit which is copper and so um
there's different there's different
options for the IUD some contain
progesterine some contain just the
copper and so the way an IUD works is
that it creates an inflammatory response
in the uterus so that um the cervical
mucus thickens so that when we are
fertile in our for fertility window
midcycle and jump in if I mess this up
the mucus of the cervix thins to the
point where sperm can actually get
through most of the month probably 85 to
90% of the month the sperm cannot
traverse the cervix you cannot you know
so in our fertility window right at
ovulation the cervical mucus thins and
then the sperm can transmit so the you
the the presence of the IUD creates an
inflammatory environment that will
basically is toxic to sperm and thickens
the cervical mucus where it becomes a
plug that's how it works works very very
well Katherine within a week her uterus
ejected it so she cramped so much that
it pushed it through and so that wasn't
an option for her. She wasn't willing to
go through that again. So then at that
point she had to go through the hormonal
options for for that and she decided to
have the implant. So it's progesterone
only implanted in her arm. Quickly we
realized she needed some estrogen. So we
she supplements estrogen on top of that.
Stephen, I think the contraceptive
discussion we have to say that there are
options that are highly effective at
preventing pregnancy and at some times
in your life that is the number one most
important goal and we need to choose a
highly effective option. However,
certain some of those options included
have downstream impacts that have not
been discussed about. The typical
contraceptive discussion says here are
some side effects you may have. If you
want to still proceed, let's go for it.
We're not talking about long-term
implications of these. We're just
talking about how you're going to feel,
not exactly what is happening in your
body. A lot of these contraceptive
options are progesterone only. And so,
you know, by your new favorite graph
that you don't see progesterone every
single day. So, when you have
progesterone only, it is shifting your
hormonal profile. And a lot of women,
this progesterone is so high that it
works by also preventing ovulation.
Makes it highly effective. But if you're
not ovulating, you're not going to be
making those high estrogen levels. And
Dr. Haver and I have even talked about
how we wish there was a contraceptive
option that had estradiol in it so that
your body could still have some estradi.
>> Estradiol. So this ethanol estradiol is
very different than plain estradiol.
They've they've put this estester group
on the end which makes it bind to the
estrogen receptor in the brain 300 times
more
>> powerful
>> powerful than regular estradile.
>> Yeah.
>> Which is why it's so effective. you know
why we do it in a micro dose versus
estradiol is dosed in milligrams and
ethanol estradile is dosed in micrograms
because it is that much more potent. Um
so very very different. Now in the UK
and in other places in Europe there is a
new form of contraception that has
asteratrol which is the fetal estrogen.
So we have four natural estrogens in the
body. The ovary produces estradile.
That's the one we all know. It it it's
really the biggest bang for our buck.
The placenta produces something called
estriol. Our fat cells and in the
peripheral tissues, the tissues outside
of the ovaries can produce something
called estrone. And then we have this
fetal estrogen called eststeratrol, if
I'm pronouncing it correctly. And so
they've they've compounded they've been
able to formulate that. Um, so it is one
of the natural estrogens and they've put
it in a birth control pill that is
available in the UK.
>> If you were 18, what choice would you
make for contraception? No,
>> studies have proven within a shadow of a
doubt that relying on natural family
planning at most ages is not a reliable
form of contraception. So I would not
recommend that and relying on condoms.
>> What do you mean by natur relying on
natural family?
>> So you timing your intercourse.
>> Oh okay.
>> So cycle tracking we know that the
fertile window is the 5 days before and
the day of ovulation
>> 5 days before
>> 5 days before and then the day of. Sperm
can live for 5 days in the female
reproductive tract. The egg lives for 24
hours. So on this graph, where is
>> Yep. So the line right is ovulation and
then the 5 days before.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So in popular culture, you would
call that natural family planning.
>> Okay. Fine.
>> Avoiding intercourse.
>> Abstaining any time in that window.
>> But but if I if I'm trying to get male
pregnant, then I should really be
aiming.
>> Yeah. Those are your target days.
>> Yeah.
>> There apps for that you can track.
>> Oh, I've got the app. Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Oh, he knows. Remember the variability.
>> He's made download it nine times.
There's a few different ways you can do
natural family planning to hijack the
discussion for a minute and they have
different degrees of effectiveness, but
one of the main issues is that they have
very large abstinence windows. So, it's
often not very sustainable to say,
"Well, we're just not going to have
intercourse for 18 days out of the month
or some very long time period, depending
on which one, because your cycle's never
perfect. What if you did ovulate sooner?
If this is all you're relying on for
your prevention of pregnancy, you have
to really assure that you know when that
ovulation is happening, it can be an
effective way to prevent pregnancy if
your cycles are very regular. But in my
brain, I wish that's what you stop the
birth control pill at least 6 months
before you want to get pregnant. And
then you start learning how to track
your cycles and you're using some
natural family planning if you're not
quite ready then because the margin of
error, oopsies, it didn't work. the
acceptance of well we were going to try
to get pregnant soon is usually okay.
It's not an effective contraception for
most of the population. We have to
factor in when we're looking at, you
know, I was trained and taught to only
look at birth control through the lens
of contraception, right? We know that
they might have some weird bleeding and
maybe a few headaches. And for some a
DVT, if they have, you know, deep venus
thrombosis, you can have blood clots.
It'll increase your risk, especially if
you have a pre-genetic disposition to
that. But what we didn't talk about were
mental health, mood, and some of the
long downstream libido effects. So,
>> of of taking,
>> right? And so then I'm looking at it
through the lens of, you know, if I'm
only looking at on the lens of she
doesn't want to be pregnant
younger patient. So you're talking about
18 is less likely to remember to do
something every day.
>> Correct.
>> Okay.
>> So then to take the impetus of
remembering to take a pill every day or
change a patch once a week um for the
patch option. Then we're looking at
maybe a vaginal ring that she inserts
for 3 weeks and removes for one for her
period.
>> Pick one. If I had to pick one right
now, if I was if it was available in the
US, I think I would go with the
Asteratrol.
>> What's that
>> option? That's the one she's saying is
in the UK, a newer option that we don't
have. No, it's still a pill. It's still
a pill. Yeah. And it's it's because it
it more
>> it looks like so far it's newer that it
has less of the downstream effects. So
you're not having that complete
suppression, you know, that complete
binding and it's it's, you know, may
have and also probably has less risk of
um DVT of blood.
>> I'll jump on this. I do not love
intrauterine device for a patient who is
18 for a multitude of reasons. Now, I'm
going to preface this to say it is an
highly effective contraceptive choice.
It's one of the most effective ones that
we have. And so there are certainly
circumstances where that is the right
thing to do. We've had IUDs in practice
for a really long time. For the majority
of this, we were only placing them in
women after they had given birth at
least once because of their size and
being able to pass them through the
cervix. Now we have different options
and we are offering them to women
younger, which is wonderful. However,
when we're putting IUDs in the uterus of
women who are really young, sometimes
the progesterone dose in them is so high
that it is preventing ovulation. And we
are seeing young women who are not
ovulating and they are not making
estrogen therefore and they don't even
really realize it because
that's not disclosed as one of the main
mechanisms of a progesterone IUD because
it doesn't happen in enough people to
effectively prevent conception that way.
It works through the inflammation, the
cervical mucus changes.
>> And why does that matter? Because if you
are not ovulating and you're not making
estrogen, you are going to have low
libido, low energy, you're not going to
build your bones during critical years.
Let's say let's say the IUD lasts 5 to
seven years. You're 18 to 25. These are
some of the most critical years in your
mental health, your bone health, your
cardiac health. And being low estrogen
during that time
>> is going to set you up on a different
risk trajectory for your entire life.
And the worst thing here about the
progesterone IUD is that because of the
progesterone, which will thin the
lining, many women just say, "I don't
have my period because my lining is so
thin." And that's a side effect of the
IUD. If that same woman was not
ovulating, and came to me and said, "I
haven't had a period in 7 years, and I
knew she was low estrogen and not
ovulating." We're highly concerned about
her health. But because she has an IUD,
what happens? Well, that's a side effect
of IUD. No big deal.
>> So, we're missing the moment to
understand where are some of these
symptoms just side effect of the IUD or
are they having a much bigger role in
what's going to happen to that woman's
long-term trajectory for being low
estrogen during crucial years? And I'll
say this, Stephen, I'm very biased,
right? I'm a fertility doctor. I see
patients who have trouble getting
pregnant. That is a narrow subset. That
is not the majority of women who have
IUDs.
>> So, what would you suggest if you had to
pick one contraceptive?
>> Vasectomy.
>> Yeah,
>> I would still do I would still do the
pill right now. The pill or the vaginal
ring? You know, I think they are both
depending on somebody's personal
preference. I just think that it's
really important if you're using the
birth control pill. I do think it's
important to give your brain a break
from the pill at times and even if
you're cycling it monthly, you there's
options now. I took the pill, an active
pill. every single day for for years, a
decade probably, meaning suppressed my
brain completely for that long. Now,
your brain sends out hormone signals
that impact your entire body, right? So,
we already talked about the hormones and
how it's this beautifully conducted
symphony. But if you even if you're
going to take the pill at that young
age, I would say take it so that you
have the seven days of not t not taking
a pill. let your brain have a moment of
release from the suppression and then
take it again. That's still a very
effective way to use the pill. But
because women don't love having periods,
we've offered these other options which
are not wrong, but they just have a
bigger consequence downstream
than we're talking about. But the pill
is very short acting. It only has a
halfife of 28 hours, meaning it is out
of your body very quickly. So, you do
want to stop the pill and see what is
happening and track your cycles. That is
something nice about it versus an
implant or an IUD. That is
>> fit and forget.
>> The fit and forgets that people like
>> set it and forget.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. The question that came in from the
10,00 women we spoke to in the diarrhea
audience was, is there any way to
control hormonal mood swings during the
luil phase of the menstrual cycle, which
I now know is the second phase of the
menstrual cycle.
>> Stephen, you've learned so much. Yes,
>> that's great. I love that. In the ludal
phase, we do tend to see more mood
changes and physical changes. And a lot
of this is because we have an increase
in estrogen and progesterone and then a
decrease in both of these hormones. And
what we find is that some women are
simply more sensitive to these changes.
They feel them quite profoundly. And
there's even something called PMDD,
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, which
is when those hormones are dropping. You
get these terrible mood swings, this
terrible depression and anxiety in
addition to physical changes with
terrible fatigue. You just feel like you
can't accomplish any of your tasks,
insomnia, quite similar to a lot of the
things that we talk about anytime we
talk about a low estrogen state,
>> right? Like po we see it in um
postpartum depression. It's a very
similar and in the permenopause
transition, we have a 40% increase in
mental health changes. And we know this
>> because women tell us and we believe
them. But what's happening is that our
neurotransmitters, especially GABA,
serotonin, and dopamine levels are
highly tied to what our hormone levels
are doing.
>> Yeah. So is this
>> is the mood swing or is the is the
what's the right term to describe a mood
when someone doesn't feel great?
>> Dysphoria.
>> Dysphoria
>> is the deoria mood after the period or
before it.
>> It's often it's before. So the estrogen
is dropping before and it stays low
through. So what happens is about the
week before your period and then the
week we'll say of your period you are
estrogen low. The rise of estrogen from
that next egg being recruited is
actually what stops you from bleeding
and helps you start to feel better.
Because of this, a lot of people will
throw a birth control pill at this
situation because they will say, "I will
give you constant hormone levels every
day and now you will not have these PMDD
symptoms anymore." However, a lot of
women don't want to be on the pill for a
variety of the different reasons we've
talked about. They just feel bad, let's
say, this week or this 7 to 10 day
interval. They don't want to suppress
ovulation. I find that a lowd dose
estrogen in the ludial phase can be very
effective in targeting after ovulation.
I'm going to take some estrogen helping
alleviate these symptoms without
interfering with ovulatory function. But
I was trained to give them an SSRI for
those 7 to 10 days.
>> An anti-depressant pill.
>> Yes, an anti-depressant only for those
two weeks. Saraphim was that the brand
name of it. And it does tend to help.
But what no one taught me and what
clinical experience has taught me and
talking to all these other smart people
is a lowd dose estrogen like
>> treating the root cause
>> treating the root cause. Just just give
her estrogen back during that time
period and she gets remarkably better.
>> In some of the nutrition research
finding that low iron and low vitamin D
are huge contributors to it. So there's
that research to investigate too, which
is interesting because there are some
women also who don't want to go on SSRI
or
>> estradile.
>> So, you know, the endocrine society does
not recommend routine testing of vitamin
D.
>> It's crazy. I I just think it's insane.
>> Yeah.
>> With my partner, I should anticipate
that her mood might drop in the leadup
to her having her period.
>> Mhm. It's very common.
>> And then after her period, it would
might recover. And whether or not that
becomes clinically significant, whether
or not it's life disruptive for her
rather than she just has a little bit of
a low mood, most women can tolerate
that. But for those who can't and that
it is disrupting their day-to-day
activities and how they feel about the
world, we have options.
>> Yeah.
>> Cuz I'm trying to understand I want to
understand her better. So I'm looking at
this little graph here which says the
brain during the menstrual cycle. So the
menstrual cycle starts when her period
starts
>> by convention. Yes. That's what we say.
Day one is the first day you start
bleeding.
>> Okay. And so what is she going to go
through for the next 29 days? And how
might I support her better through that
journey?
>> Like I want to understand what's going
on in her brain.
>> Her brain starts by s from a
reproductive hormone level. The brain
starts by sending out FSH, follical
stimulating hormone, which is going to
get her ovary to start growing an egg
which lives inside a follicle and making
estrogen. And that rise in estrogen as
it's growing will stop her from
bleeding. So the beginning that cycle
day one, the bleeding that she's
experiencing or her period is because
she didn't get pregnant in the month
before. So it's getting rid of that
indometrial lining, cleaning the slate.
She's estrogen and progesterone low
during that time period. And then once
her bleeding stops, it's because an egg
has been chosen. Estrogen is then going
to rise until it gets to that peak
level. During that time, she's going to
feel her best for most women.
>> So is that the first 14 days? So the
week by convention if you had a 28 day
cycle which only about 13% of women
actually do but all of these graphs if
you look at usually use 28 days because
it's easy to go week by week
>> and that's the lunar calendar.
>> Yeah 28 days.
>> We see that but we have to acknowledge
that most women don't have a 28 day
cycle. So but it is roughly the first
two weeks for most women to get up to
that ovulatory time period. So the time
from I have started bleeding until I am
now ovulating, that is all considered
the follicular phase.
>> And on this little image that I have in
front of me here, it says in those first
14 days, she's going to have better
spatial skills and be more anxious.
>> So once you get to your estrogen
dominant, so you have a lot of estrogen
and you don't have progesterone, most
women can are have increased
concentration. They have more focus.
They actually can sleep better. They
have higher libido. you feel like your
performance even for athletes
performance tends to be improved
aggression concentration more yeah
>> during what we call the late follicular
phase so that means the time period when
you're really making that estrogen let's
call it days 7 to 14 for ease so I'm now
done bleeding a follicle is growing
meaning an egg is making enough estrogen
to stop that bleeding I've not yet
ovulated and seen progesterone this is
where we typically have our best
performance overall from how our body is
functioning
>> and then From day 14 onwards,
I'm she's going to be calmer.
>> Well, progesterone slows your body's
metabolism down. It It's preparing you
for that pregnancy. Calmer is a nice way
to put it, but essentially, your
metabolic rate is going to change. Your
body's going to shift how it functions.
Many women actually have fatigue.
They're hungry. Specifically in the
brain, progesterone levels as they rise,
we see an increase in GABA, which is a
neurotransmitter, one of our brain
hormone, one of our brain, you know,
hormones that talks, you know, jumps
between one one neuron to the other. And
that is more of a calming hormone. So
women tend to we see sleep changes more.
You see deeper sleep, longer sleep in
that ludial phase.
>> She's and on this it says she's going to
have she's going to be horny for day 14.
I don't know how else to say it.
>> Because she has an egg available
>> because that's that peak estrogen. That
estrogen level of 200 pograms is
heightening everything. To have peak
libido when an egg is released, the body
is made that way on purpose.
>> This is a bit off script, but my
girlfriend always talks about her HRV
>> being very different. And so she she has
really great HRV scores and then once
every month for a period of time they're
terrible and she can't explain it. So
this is where wearables come into play.
>> Yeah.
>> So wearables are not designed to capture
women's physiology. So what happens
after ovulation is your respiratory rate
goes up, your resting heart rate goes
up, and your HRV plummets. So on the
wearables, most women about 5 days
before their periods start will never be
in the clear, so to speak. They will
never look recovered. They will never
look like they can take on a lot of
stress. They're not stress resilient
because of the way the algorithms are
reading this change that is natural that
is produced by progesterone to alter our
respiratory rate and our heart rate. It
doesn't mean that she's not stress
resilient is what the wearable is
saying.
>> Ah cuz she came downstairs and she said,
"Oh god, my recovery is so bad." And
then I think a couple of days later, a
little while later, she had a period.
I'm not sure. I can't remember the time
frames, but she came downstairs and she
was like shocked that she had done
everything right,
>> but her recovery on on her wearable said
that she was in terrible state.
>> This is why we do not let athletes use
wearables leading up to a peak event
because they feed into what the wearable
respond or telling them and it's not
true data with regards to how their body
can actually perform. So wearables data
masters then need to segate segregate
populations and make new norms for women
and maybe new norms for different
fitness levels of women.
>> Exactly. I've always been pushing for
the past five or six years interacting
with wearable companies is like if you
want to capture it well then you need to
be able to compare follicular to
follicular and ludial to ludal.
>> What does that mean? So comparing
>> like we know your HIV is going to be
different in your follicular phase.
This is not a bad thing.
>> People could could theoretically do that
on their wearables and look at the
previous month and see the the level
you're at then theoretically. Obviously
the wearable companies could do a lot
more here to to
>> definitely helpful but no you then it
comes back again on the woman trying to
understand and interpret the data
herself which can be a little bit
problematic because there's so many
women out there like my wearable told me
that I'm in the red I can't do anything
today when in fact physically and
psychologically they can do what they
set out to do. It's just now they have
this little seed saying that no, you
can't do it because of an improper
algorithm on their wearable.
>> Probably a good time to disclose that
I'm an investor in
push.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah,
>> I will send this to them.
>> Please. Yeah.
>> You wear Do you wear any devices to
track your health data?
>> I wear I wear a CGM and a Whoop.
Just give me a minute of your time and
I'll tell you about a device that my
team's been using that they won't seem
to shut up about. It's called the Note
Pro and it's by our sponsor Plaude. This
tiny card clips onto the back of your
phone and captures everything. But why
it's so clever is that it picks up
multiple voices at the same time. And
when someone says something important,
you just push this tiny little button
here and that moment gets highlighted in
your notes and captured. It records the
conversations that it hears, takes those
conversations, creates a transcript, and
it uses AI to synthesize all of that
information into whatever template suits
you. You get a summary, action points,
highlights, and even a mind map sent
straight to the Plaude app. So, I highly
recommend you check out Plaude's
products using the link in the
description below. Don't tell anybody
this, but if you use code DOAC22,
you'll get 22% off on some of Plaude's
products. Do any of you remember a
conversation I had on this podcast with
anthropologist Daniel Lieberman? It was
one of our most viewed conversations of
all time and the most replayed moment in
that conversation was when I talked
about this product. These are what I
call barefoot shoes by Vivo Barefoot,
which have significantly reduced
support, which gives my feet the
opportunity that they desperately want
to need to strengthen. We're living in a
comfort crisis, and that at all times in
our lives, we're making this trade of
whether to have more comfort now and
therefore more discomfort in the future
or a little bit less comfort now, but to
be stronger and healthier in the future.
And research from Liverpool University
has backed this up. They've shown that
wearing Vivo Barefoot shoes for 6 months
can increase foot strength by up to 60%.
So if you want to start strengthening
your feet and your body, visit vivo
barefoot.com/stephven
and you'll get 20% off when you use code
stephven
at checkout. That also comes with a
100day money back guarantee. I want to
close off on the subject of fertility
because it was um heavily asked by our
audience and I I guess I'm well placed
to ask some of these questions because
I'm in that journey myself of trying to
have a child at the moment. Natalie, you
have five fertility non-negotiables that
you talk about.
>> I do and I think it's really important
to think about
for too long we've been told, you know,
your fertility is luck. It's good luck
if you get pregnant. It's bad luck if
it's not. And that's this narrative that
gets propagated. And fertility is
certainly not fair. Meaning people will
have infertility and do everything
right. But there are things that we do
that will inherently also harm our
fertility and our hormonal health and
make it harder to get pregnant. And
that's even when we are doing
treatments. So a lot of times people
say, "I'm doing IVF so I don't need to
worry about these non-negotiables." And
that's also not true. meaning things
that we need to do. We need to, as we've
all said, get more sleep. That's going
to be number one. We need to actively
work to decrease stress. That is not a
I'm just going to live a stress-free
life. But all these things I'm going to
not take call. I'm going to set some
boundaries and not have late meetings.
I'm going to see morning light. I'm
going to take a walk outside. We live in
a stressful world and chronic stress
itself can impact your fertility, your
natural fertility, and IVF success
rates. We're going to work on exercise
to build muscle and try to improve our
muscular health since it's part of our
metabolism. We're going to eat an
anti-inflammatory diet. That's
definitely key, high in fiber. And we're
going to look at the world around us and
work on pulling toxins out of our world
that we know we haven't even entered the
discussion about how environmental
toxins is harming our body, our hormonal
health, our fertility, our ovaries, our
organs. And so these are all things that
we make active choices on that we have
to start paying attention to and kind of
changing.
>> We'll go into detail in the lifestyle
factors and the environmental toxins um
in our second episode together. I I've
always been quite shocked by this graph
because it's quite um
>> quite significant. This is just showing
the
>> um egg count by age. Slide that into
that direction. um what do men and women
need to understand about egg counts in
order to make better family planning and
fertility decisions?
>> Okay. Well, I've asked you this last
time. So, Stephen, how many sperm do you
make a second?
>> Millions.
>> You make 1500 a second. You mean you
make millions every day? Is okay. But
still, you still you make a ton of
sperm. You make sperm every single day.
You have germ cells that create sperm.
Women are born with all the eggs you're
ever going to have. And yes, my favorite
vault analogy. So, I like to imagine
that this is a vault inside your ovary
that is storing all of your eggs. And
so, we'll use this cup with all of the
beads as that analogy. And every single
month, since before you are born, eggs
come out of this vault. And what happens
is that when the vault is more full,
more eggs come out every month. And as
the vault starts to get emptier, fewer
come out. And this means that we lose
the majority of our eggs, you can see
the line, well before our reproductive
years even start. So you lose the most
before you're born. So from being a
5-month baby to birth, your egg count
goes from 6 to 7 million to 1 to 2
million.
>> Millions of eggs lost before you're even
born. From birth to puberty, let's say
you go from 1 to 2 million to half a
million to simplify numbers. So, the
second biggest drop before you're ever
ovulating, before you ever have a chance
to get pregnant, and then you only
ovulate around 400 eggs over the course
of your reproductive lifespan, as that
egg count starts to drop over time, the
other really, really big important
factor is that our eggs have been in our
body our whole life. Two different
things are happening at the same time.
One is that our chromosomes start to
leave their perfect position. They
absorb the wear and tear of years. So we
see more chromosome abnormalities as we
get older. It's why it's harder to get
pregnant and why we see an increase in
miscarriage as we age. But also
concurrently our metabolic health is
poor as we are older too. And
mitochondrial function in eggs. The
metabolic capacity becomes less capable.
And so we see that it's harder to get
pregnant not because women are running
out of eggs but because the quality of
the eggs declines. But everybody will
run out of eggs. You'll have a period of
time where you have a very low egg
count. We call it diminished ovarian
reserve in the fertility world. We call
it perry menopause more globally. And
this this is two words to describe the
same thing. As your egg count starts to
get very low, you start to have an
unpredictable response to your ovary and
your brain is trying to compensate for
that. And so you see various hormone
changes, but these start before you
might recognize even menstrual cycle
changes. But everybody will run out of
eggs. Every woman will. your ovaries
will go into what we call ovarian
failure and no longer respond to
hormonal signals from the brain or
artificial signals that we give.
Meaning, I will see older women come in
and think that I have magic medicines
with IVF that can still help them get
pregnant, but I can only get the eggs
outside the vault to grow in IVF. And
>> so, shouldn't we then be freezing our
eggs?
>> You're right. As a society, if we are
purposely delaying childbearing, we know
that it gets harder to get pregnant with
age. And if having kids is a life goal,
putting eggs into the freezer earlier is
a way to save that opportunity. It's not
an insurance plan. It's not a guarantee,
but it is a smart game plan, especially
as we are waiting longer. Because even
with IVF, we can't always overcome age
related infertility if we have fewer
eggs and more genetic abnormalities. The
technology helps us identify healthy
eggs, helps us have more eggs, able to
grow in a certain month and take them
out and test embryos in a lab, but I'm
working with the eggs and sperm that
you're giving me. Meaning, if there's
not many of them, if there's a lot of
chromosomeal damage, if there's a lot of
mitochondrial dysfunction, if the sperm
quality is not great, that doesn't mean
we're going to be able to have success.
So, what you're doing on a daily basis
to impact egg and sperm quality is still
crucial. But egg freezing has gotten a
lot of bad rap. It's still a new
technology. It's only been around about
10 years off experimental purposes.
Meaning that women who froze their egg
10 years ago, you know, they have much
poorer egg survival rates. They were
older at the time. Their experience is
very different than the modern woman who
is freezing her eggs now, maybe in her
upper 20s or early 30s.
>> What is the optimal age? If you are want
to have a child as a life goal and
you're not ready to conceive by age 32,
that is when there's a clear delineation
that it makes smarter financial sense as
well as likelihood sense. The short
answer like my daughter will freeze her
eggs in her 20s. The younger you are,
the more eggs that you have. If she
says, "I want to have kids as a life
goal," then that will be something that
we will do in order to help her keep
that because there's so many other
variables which impact your ability to
get pregnant or your egg count.
Endometriosis decreases your egg count,
right? People will develop an ovarian
cyst and they'll have
>> surgery,
>> surgery, they'll have a twisting of
their ovary and maybe they'll lose an
ovary,
>> smoking, chemo, radiation,
>> smoking, marijuana, any abdominal
surgery. So many things can impact your
your eggs because you only have this
group. You're born with them. So we we
plan for life goals differently. And
we've never really talked about our
fertility life goals until more
recently. Meaning when we went
professional career, right? We knew what
we had to do to get into medical school,
to get into residency, to get your PhD,
you had this list of things and you set
goals and you worked to achieve them.
But I always wanted to be a mom. Yet, I
already told you I took a birth control
pill every single day and I didn't even
think about it until that moment was in
front of me. And that's the part of the
discussion that we do have to start to
have earlier is if this is a life goal
for you, what do we need to do?
Understand our body better, our
fertility better, and maybe that does
include freezing eggs because it does
give many women an opportunity that time
would eliminate.
I had a conversation with you Natalie on
the podcast but then many other women
over the course of the last two to three
years and one of the things that I
learned from that was that we as you say
we don't family plan and then we have to
deal with the consequences of not family
planning. So, as an interviewer, when I
do life story episodes, I go through a
woman's life story. And obviously, the
women that's sitting in front of me are
typically high performers, high
achievers in some capacity. And then we
arrive at the end of the conversation
when we talk about family and kids and
all those kinds of things. And there's
often a lot of tears. And it was in
those conversations sitting here with
several women that were on the show.
What was the straw that broke the
camel's back? It was the UFC fighter
Ronda Rousey. It just so happened that
when I interviewed her, she had just
found out that her seventh round of IVF
had failed. And so she was very, very
emotional. I left that interview and had
a conversation with my girlfriend. I was
like, "Listen, I've I've seen too many
of um too many women over the age of 35,
maybe sort of under the age of 50, but
really under the age of 45 in tears in
front of me. I think we should have a
conversation about this. Should we
freeze our eggs?" I mean, me and my
partner are both 33 now. And um at first
I don't know, maybe it was the way I
worded it.
>> She was offended.
>> She was like, "You don't want to have a
baby with me?"
>> It was like Yeah. It was like, "You
don't want to have sex with me?" Like I
like didn't word it well. Like I didn't
I didn't really think I didn't really
think about the emotions surrounding it.
I think that was really what it
>> You were trying to make a pragmatic
decision.
>> Yeah. I was as men often do. Like I was
just like we should free but I didn't
think about what that meant. And there's
this this prevailing narrative in
society that if something's not quote
unquote natural, then it's not good.
>> And that IVF or egg freezing is not
natural.
>> And that like torments people's brains
because they want to live a natural life
even though they're in like [__]
planes and on on iPhones. We want this
one area of our life to be
>> natural. And after honestly five minutes
of that conversation,
I think the framing that m flipped her
mood was that wouldn't we want to give
ourselves the option,
>> right?
>> And it's actually about having options.
But I wanted to throw that out there
because, you know, I don't think people
family plan. I think as you said, we
focus on our careers, then we pop up at
35, 36, 37 and assume that we can.
>> Mhm.
>> But that is not the case.
>> Yeah. Especially if you live a healthy
life, you you think, "Oh, this will be
easy for me." or if you're a high
achiever and you've achieved other
things, many women are really taken
aback by not being able to achieve this
or not having control over infertility
and what is a natural process to run out
of eggs and to go into menopause. If you
are lucky to live long enough, this is
going to happen. I got my diagnosis of
PCOS in medical school before I was
ready to start, you know, family
planning. And I knew I was probably
going to struggle. And so it took us
about 3 years to successfully conceive
the first time. And
you can't even though I'm working in the
business, you know, I'm running between
patients to go and have another
ultrasound or go get a shot or go do all
the things that it took, you know, you
you can't remove the emotion from it.
And I can't tell you how many times I
cried. And of course, all of my
co-residents, my four best friends, all
got pregnant in succession, our poor
chief residents, and with no trouble,
you know, and even like crying to my
mother about the struggles I was having,
she's like, I just I got pregnant eight
times with no trouble, you know, and
then my first pregnancy resulted in a
miscarriage and, you know, in the middle
of work and all my friends were there
and they were cheering. They were so
excited I was finally pregnant and then
we lost the baby and you know and having
to like push through and work through
it's like it was yesterday like you know
I have two healthy kids thank God and
you know we were never after those two
we tried again we were never able to get
pregnant again which you know I had two
kids and put a bow on it and we're done
but it is impossible to remove the
emotion because
you because in the mindset it's luck or
it's something we did
>> we caused this and it's I you know as a
high performing you know someone who's
like you check all the boxes and you
make all the good grades and you do
everything right and this is the one
thing that suddenly you didn't think
much about and then it becomes
everything
when that ch that that becomes hard or
it's taken away from you but I think
women assume that it's our burden
>> because we assume that if we can't
conceive it's just us or something But I
think I heard you say this, the the it's
a two-way street and and the issue is
not always the woman. A high percentage
of the time it's her partner. And so I
don't think we absorb that information
upfront either until we start
investigating it. But I'm in awe of this
story that four of your residents got
pregnant immediately because in
orthopedics that does not happen. Mhm.
>> Every orthopedic surgeon in my
generation that I know if we got
pregnant we miscarried and maybe that
was lifestyle and maybe that was not
eating for 40 hours. Maybe it's all the
radiation that we undertake. I think
it's better now for the younger
generation and we as the I'm not that
old but I am older than the current
residents. Um, we encourage all of them.
If you are not partnered and wanting to
have a child now, then please consider
freezing your eggs if that's a goal
because we can't predict our futures and
our residencies extend into our 40s.
>> Well, I love that you're helping
facilitate that discussion because that
certainly wasn't the culture back when
we were in training. I am one of the
ones who sat here and cried in front of
Steven myself when talking about my own
pregnancy loss journey just because you
know I see it every day you know and I
tell patients every day news that they
do not want to hear
>> 50% of infertility is due to male factor
50% is due to female factors one of the
most important things I want to convey
when we on this topic is that IVF is an
amazing technology that has helped 13
million babies be born. It has been
life-changing and world changing. And
things don't have to be natural.
Sometimes the natural progression of
disease is death. So we have technology
and science that exists to optimize and
improve life and to help life exist. And
that's part of what IVF is. And I think
that's important because we do see a
narrative right now that IVF is
inherently bad and natural fertility
approaches are inherently good. And we
truly need to say both things are good.
Do women need to learn about their
bodies earlier? Talk about cycle
tracking, take better care of
themselves, get an earlier investigation
when things aren't going well?
Absolutely true. But also, needing to
have fertility treatments is not a
failure. Needing to see a fertility
doctor is not a failure. If you need
IVF, that is okay. All the other stuff
is still really important to the outcome
of your journey. But this narrative of
IVF isn't natural, so it's bad, or egg
freezing isn't natural, so we shouldn't
do it. That's harmful to society and to
women who do carry the burden, whether
they need to or not, women do carry the
burden of family planning for the
future.
>> Hearing you talk about that is very
interesting to me because in other parts
of medicine, in my own medicine, right,
we were talking outside about how I I
now do knee surgery through needles.
It's an advancement of technology. We
celebrate that. We like better things
for people. It's not natural. Live with
your thing, right? But I'm capable of
helping you live a better life.
>> Right.
>> So, it's interesting to me.
>> It's the stigma of women's health and
work.
>> That's right. This has because this is
women's health. We're going to control
it. We're going to protect these gals.
We're not going to apply the vast
knowledge. I'm a little offended by it
actually. If you want to know the truth,
why can I be so encouraged and and be
considered top of my field when I adopt
new technologies?
But in your field, 13 million parents or
26 million parents
would be told that technology is not
okay.
>> I agree. It's a terrible narrative that
is happening right now in the political
landscape. And I think it's important to
say scientific advancement is good and
it changes the lives for so many people.
And I think it's just highlighting this
idea about natural doesn't always mean
better. I think as you know scientists
and people in medicine there's also been
a disservice to not trying to get to the
root cause and not working on preventive
medicine and so going towards treatments
and technology which has made the lay
person feel like half of the picture
wasn't discovered or talked about
>> and so we can do better on both ends of
it and that comes to women's health more
than anything because there is stigma
when it comes to isolation there's in I
mean when it comes to infertility
there's isolation
you know being left behind your peer
group. Questioning a life goal will make
you question who you are, your life
meaning, your purpose. And that is an
extremely stressful and challenging
state for somebody to go through. And we
should be giving more support to that.
We should be saying freeze your eggs.
You're at a stressful lifetime instead
of the narrative that we are seeing
right now. So would the message be to
young men and women that want to have
kids at some point in their life to
freeze their eggs in their 20s? Is that
what you would advise?
>> You know, most people in their 20s maybe
don't have good awareness of these
goals, but certainly your, you know,
later 20s, your early 30s are the prime
opportunity where you still, for the
average person, you're going to have a
high number of eggs. You're still high
on the graph and your egg quality is
still going to be high. meaning it's
going to be easier to get the outcome
that you want. Certainly in your 20s
would be ideal if you but it's
expensive. A lot of people don't have
the financial resources to freeze their
eggs and their 20s they're in training
or they're starting their career. So to
have an extra $10,000 lying around isn't
always realistic.
>> And I think that's why people are often
waiting because that feels, you know,
elective, you know, like, oh, that's
extra money. I don't know that I have
that right now. when we see insurance
that starts to cover egg freezing as an
option, we see huge uptake in women
going to freeze their eggs. So you will
see at companies where almost less than
5% of women would freeze their eggs
before age 35. And then they introduced
a health plan that would cover egg
freezing and up to 50% of them would. So
you can see that both financially and
access and awareness, they all go hand
in hand. But that's a big player in
being able to do that because it is an
expensive process.
>> So Dr. Crawford, I think what most
people don't understand, what is the
spontaneous fertility rate by age in
general?
>> Yeah. So if you are 30, your odds of
getting pregnant monthly. We we use a
monthly rate called fundability. It's
going to be at best 20% per month. When
you're in your 20s, it's a little bit
higher. Can get up to 25% per month
>> if you're having sex
>> monthly and regular periods. So if
you're having unprotected intercourse
and you have regular cycles, your best
odds in a given month are going to be
about 20% at age 30.
>> How much sex do you have to be having?
>> Well, really just have to have it in
that fertile window. The
>> what? Just once or
>> really just once? Yeah, sex solely on
the day of ovulation would be the ideal
time, but you just need to have at least
intercourse at least once in that
fertile window. But that number drops
quite significantly to what Dr. Caver is
saying. So, at age 35, if you're trying
to get pregnant, it's going to be 10 to
12% per month odds of getting pregnant.
At age 38, it's going to be 5% per
month. At age 40, it's going to be 3%.
This if you're trying for the first
time, they're a little bit higher if
you've had a child already because
there's some proven fertility factors.
But if we look at that, you say, "I'm
chasing these dreams. I'm going to try
to have my first baby at age 38." You
have a 5% chance per month. That's not
zero, but that means the greatest
probability is that by 6 months time
frame, you won't be pregnant. And then
you're going to start a pathway of
trying to investigate why that is
happening. And if you do need
intervention, you're further down this
graph, too. You're going to have less
eggs to work with, and their quality is
going to be less good. That's why those
numbers drop rapidly. Natural fertility
rates are not about being out of eggs
because you ovulate just one egg at a
time. It doesn't matter if you have 20
eggs outside that vault or five eggs.
You're ovulating one egg at a time. So
natural fertility is all about egg and
sperm quality. So the this huge drop we
see from 20% to 5% is because of the
change of our egg quality as we get
older during our 30s which most of us
feel like is really young.
>> And what can I do to because I know
weight has a role in egg quality right?
If you're underweight or overweight, is
there anything else that has a a really
pertinent impact on the quality of my
eggs?
>> Yes. So, we have two factors. We'll say
age, which you can't control to an
extent, right? Chromosome damage is
going to happen even if you are
exceptionally healthy because tincture
of time. They've been sitting inside
your body. Chromosome damage builds up.
But the variables that you can is
everything that impacts cellular health.
So chronic inflammation and insulin
resistance are the two things that are
going to most dramatically harm your
eggs metabolic function. It's going to
harm your mitochondria. You're going to
get mitochondrial damage. We know that
when we start looking at older women,
they have more dysfunctional
mitochondria. They're shaped abnormally.
The products inside their follicular
fluid show higher levels of inflammation
just based on age that happens, but also
if they start having infertility versus
not having infertility. So we know that
inflammation and insulin resistance are
key players even in patients without
known PCOS or endometriosis but they
play a role in aging and specifically
your egg health as you age. So if you
say getting pregnant is a life goal. I'm
tracking my cycles. I don't want to
freeze my eggs right now, but what
should I do? All these things that we
talk about and we're going to talk more
about to decrease inflammation inside
our body. That's it. and from a young
age because these changes build up over
time.
>> And if I have PCOS, how does that
>> even more important because you're at a
higher predisposition to have insulin
resistance? Your cells are more
sensitive to how they're going to
respond.
>> But do I have less eggs if I have PCOS?
>> So, you're going to run out of eggs
around the same time. You're born with a
little bit more, but because you lose
eggs based on how many you have,
essentially, you're going to catch up.
So during your reproductive years, you
tend to have more eggs out of the vault,
which interferes with normal hormonal
signaling, making all of the hormonal
metabolic changes worse. Very
interesting thing, as women with PCOS
tend to get older, and their egg count
starts to drop, and they have fewer eggs
coming out of the vault, they'll often
start naturally ovulating, even if they
didn't earlier. And so I'm always a
little concerned when somebody said, "I
used to never have periods, but now I
do. Did I cure my PCOS?
Maybe they did make some good lifestyle
changes along the way, but honestly,
that's a red flag for me that she's now
more rapidly declining in her egg count,
approaching what will be penmenopause
for her because her egg count is low
enough to then respond to the brain
signals. Like nodding your head over
here.
>> And as a man, is there anything I can do
to increase the odds that I'm going to
impregnate? Mel,
>> you can stop using um cannabis and
smoking cigarettes, um drinking alcohol.
We need to avoid heat. So the testicles
are outside the body for a reason. They
need to be at a lower body temperature
in order to adequately make normally
functioning sperm. So hot tubs, saunas,
those should be off limits if you're
wanting to get pregnant. Same with
highintensity exercise and compression
of the testicles. So this is notably
cycling for long periods of time. So an
hour on the bike or more routinely can
actually compress the testicles and
increase their heat.
>> What about sitting in a chair for 5
hours? choose. She'll be fine. I want to
Same thing. Sitting in a chair, boxers
breathe, being in a room that's hot.
Those things aren't quite enough to
truly raise that core testicular
temperature quite like some of these
other things. We also see diet playing a
big role. The great thing about men,
you're making sperm every single second.
The sperm lifespan is 90 days, 72 days
to make a sperm, 18 days to get out the
ejaculatory system. But that means you
could make a singular change in your
health and see a different outcome in
your sperm. that is so rare that doesn't
exist in women's health that one
variable can move the needle so much.
>> Marijuana is a huge one. Marijuana use
works at the brain to prevent those FSH
and LH signals which are crucial to tell
your testicles to make sperm and they
also impact inflammatory environment. So
sperm are not as modal. They are not
shaped as well. The DNA inside their
heads is more fragmented. In fact, men
who use marijuana, their partners have a
higher rate of pregnancy loss, even if
their partners are not around it at all.
>> You're using the word pregnancy loss
versus the word that we're aware of in
the UK called miscarriage. Is that is
that intentional?
>> Miscarriage can mean, you know, a to a
lot of different things to people and a
pregnancy loss, an unsuccessful
pregnancy depending on when you
medically lose a pregnancy or if a
pregnancy is in the fallopian tube and
it's an ectopic pregnancy, that's still
a pregnancy loss. meaning you had a
positive pregnancy test that did not end
up in a baby. So, it's a little more
inclusive for a variety of different
stages of when and how loss can occur.
>> Miscarriage kind of infers when we say
it, you know, on my end is that the
pregnancy was in the uterus and now it's
it's we we either have to evacuate it or
it's it's self evacuating.
>> And you were saying a second ago, Vonda,
that it from your experience, pregnancy
loss, miscarriage is much higher with
women who have high stress careers and
jobs. Well, I don't know the real
statistics, but my I'm sure they exist.
But in my experience as a high capacity,
high stress, not sleeping for 11 or 22
years,
I have seen it a lot and it happened to
me.
>> Yeah, chronic stress is associated with
a higher rate of pregnancy loss.
>> Is there anything else that people
misunderstand about pregnancy loss in
miscarriage that is worth talking about?
>> Well, it's not talked about, I think.
>> Yeah. That's one of the things that
people still think it's it's taboo and
rare, but I think all of us around the
table had pregnancy loss.
>> Yep. Two, at least two.
>> And when I had mine, I was in training
and uh a I didn't want to call my
attending and tell them cuz he was a
man.
>> And I didn't want to I didn't think I
could take any time off.
>> Same.
>> I went back the next day. I would have
gone back the same day, but I could
barely move.
>> I was running labor and delivery like at
night.
>> I got discharged. Ivy pulled out in my
hand and went back on the war.
>> Yeah. Like so I think hopefully part of
this international conversation about
women's health not just
gynecological health but health in
general will give women grace because
there's no way that I should have been
expected to go back to an orthopedic
surgery residency the day after I lost a
child
or frankly I don't know what your
experiences were but in my generation of
doctors and I'm sure it happens
everywhere. I went back to work less
than five weeks after delivering a child
and I think other European countries
have it right.
>> Oh yeah, New Zealand is a year time.
>> I I
weeks.
>> Six weeks.
>> I six weeks with one and three weeks
with the other because if I wanted to
>> leave my fellowship on time,
>> that's right.
>> I wanted to graduate on time, I couldn't
exceed the total vacation. So these
internships and fellowships and I'm I'm
sure that built into these programs we
sign up for, they were all developed for
men
>> who had had they had a family, had a
wife, you had someone at home to like
take care of that business.
>> Yeah.
>> And we're have, you know, we're all in
supportive relationships and, you know,
that wasn't the issue, but like I went
back before my body was ready.
>> Yeah. because I would
>> before that baby was ready to to unlatch
and my milk supply dropped immediately
the minute why I went back to work
>> and I tried to pump but you get called
for a crash C-section or emergency
surgery and you're like pulling the pump
off the breast and I'm running down the
hall hooking my nursing bra back on
trying to get to the O and you know all
that cortisol just my milk you know so I
was able to breastfeed while I was home
with the baby and but like once I went
back to work my my milk production just
shattered a picture of day in the
hospital and it was a day after I gave
birth. My laptop is open. I'm trying to
breastfeed because we launched a company
the month before I gave birth and
instead of my male co-workers going,
"Okay, we'll give you some grace." No, I
had a week and then they were at my
house having meetings. There's such a
different discussion about miscarriage
now than when I went through it. I told
nobody. I didn't either.
>> I mean, it was so secretive. I didn't
feel like I could. And we are seeing a
different generation where I do think
talking about women's health and Stephen
you having these discussions on a bigger
stage are lessening the stigma for what
is something that people go through. One
out of four pregnancies will end in a
pregnancy loss. That is not a low
percentage of people. In the same
breath, most people should not have two
in a row. And if you do, you should go
get an evaluation because there are
medical things that can contribute to
pregnancy loss that we would love to
identify a lot earlier and see if
there's something we can do to make that
different. What do I need to understand
about what a woman goes through either
in the wake of pregnancy loss or in the
wake of a pregnancy and uh a birth
physiologically, psychologically as an
employer to be able to create a better
environment for the women that are going
through either of those two things? Like
what's what's going on inside the body?
Cuz I I wouldn't know, right? So,
>> one of the, you know, simplest things to
say that's going on is that pregnancy is
one of the most hormone robust times you
have, even just momentarily pregnant. If
you have a placenta starting to implant,
you are now making levels of estrogen
and progesterone that you will not ever
make at any other time period of your
life. When that doesn't when you lose
that pregnancy or when you're
postpartum, let's say you're having this
huge hormone crash. Suddenly you go from
this very high level of these hormones
dropping off immediately. And in
addition to all the physical changes,
the emotional changes that has a huge
impact, you've heard us talk a lot about
low estrogen and how that feels. The
very interesting thing most studies
about estrogen show is that the hardest
time for women is when estrogen is
changing. So going from high to low is
actually when your body is having
>> your brain can't keep up.
>> Can't keep up. Doesn't know what's
happening. And the higher you were and
the faster you come down, we'll use this
analogy too. Even in IVF, when we go do
an egg retrieval and somebody had many
eggs, they have a much higher estrogen
they naturally would. I go and put a
needle in each one and drain the eggs
out and destroy those cells and their
estrogen plummets and they expect to go
the next day and feel normal or they
expect to feel worse during the
stimulation process when they're using
hormone shots. And I always say, you're
actually going to feel worse when I'm
done with you. It's going to be that
week after the egg retrieval where your
hormones go from the highest they've
ever been very quickly down low. It's
that delta, that change. And that
happens anytime you have that. But
pregnancy and loss and postpartum are
some of the most profound times that you
experience this.
>> And one of the other things is the
identity shift. So if you're working,
you know, we are all very highly
motivated and became parents. But it's
that whole identity shift of now how do
I interact in my life and how do I
interact with my peers? I'm a mom. How
am I being identified? What are the
implications? So there's a complete
identity shift that also isn't discussed
>> and that can also perpetuate some of the
postpartum that we see as well.
>> Mhm.
>> And anxiety and lack of control, right?
Because you don't know what you're
supposed to do, especially if you're a
mother for the first time. that is can
be very anxietyprovoking in addition to
hormone changes and not getting sleep.
But lack of control, you don't control
your schedule. You don't control when
you sleep. You don't control if your
child gets sick.
>> And so I would say from an employer
standpoint,
>> grace, support, and flexibility. You
know, if I had had better support
structures to say when your child is
sick, it's not the end of the world if
you are not here physically at the
office. That didn't exist. meaning that
my child getting sick became this
extremely
stressful situation.
>> God,
>> but for the average woman working a 9
toive job, whether it's in medicine or
other fields, if you could design their
working month around their menstrual
cycle around, I don't know, potentially
a pregnancy, whatever. How would you
design redesign their month? Because we
we have inherited this sort of I think
it's like from the industrial
revolution, this like 9 to5 working
hours. We don't work Saturday and
Sunday. We do that four times across a
month. What would you change? What
should women change? Because I've heard
some countries or systems are are trying
to give women time off around certain
parts of their cycle, for example. Would
any of you change anything? Well, there
are a couple of companies in New Zealand
who are pretty flexible, especially
after the pandemic, where they have
allocated certain hours that are free to
work at home. You just have to get the
work done
>> to the point where they have 4 day
working weeks. And then they're also
putting into the annual leave what they
call menstrual leave or menopause leave.
And it's you just say, you know, I can't
come today. Some people are using it for
child care. Some people are using it for
really bad cramping days. Other people
are using it for mental health days. But
it's a it's there to be used for
however. And you don't have to identify
it as being menstrual cycle day or
menopause. It's just extra leave. And
people don't care as long as you get the
work done. And I think that having that
flexibility across, you know, if you
have that ability to have more flex
hours or shared time space or something
like that greatly benefits productivity
as well as the feeling of empowerment
and inclusivity, which then feeds
forward to better productivity.
>> If I've got an extremely high stress
job, is there any part of the cycle
where I should theoretically be avoiding
stress?
>> Well, that's an individual thing. It's
how because you know we hear all the
stuff about cycle tracking and it's
about understanding your own responses
to your own hormone flux
>> because Mel partner says to me that she
needs to not do work. there's like a
couple of days a month where she's like,
I'm just gonna nest all those.
>> That could be her her responses and
she's like, I just don't have the stress
tolerance to be able to do XYZ and
understanding that in her own cycle is
great because then she can allocate
tasks that take more stress for other
days. For most people, it's peak ludal.
Also when your progesterone is the
highest tends to be when people have a
harder time focusing and concentrating
or getting tasks done now
>> which is where on
>> which is going to be the middle of the
ludal phase at the middle of this second
half of the cycle when you have that
oneish.
>> So when you have that progesterone you
know really high your body might be
ready to implant an embryo if there was
one that tends to be when people say
they feel more fatigue and less energy
and less focus and concentration. So if
you are looking at your month and you
might notice that it is and you have the
flexibility to say okay I'm going to try
to write this paper get this study done
do these tasks that call these tasks
that call for an increased focus in my
follicular phase when I'm estrogen
dominant have high estrogen and no
progesterone for the average person that
is typically when they're easier have an
easier time achieving those tests
>> which is the first 14
>> yeah the first couple weeks the time
period before ovulation, but there is an
individual response and I definitely
will see some people who they feel
immensely better when progesterone's
present and not so great the other time.
So, I think we use generalizations just
as a rule of thumb because that's what
it is for most people, but hormones
specifically, there's always an
individualized response and learning to
listen to your own body is key and
knowing what you need to do. I want to
close off on this point about just how
employers and you know the way that we
work can be better suited to a woman's
health. Is there anything else we missed
there?
>> Flexibility. I think we mentioned before
the ability to make a decision for
yourself. This is a day that I can do
these, you know, tasks. I think every
woman wants to do a really good job and
she is going to frontload those tasks on
a time that she feels better and offload
in a time where she's not feeling as
well, but she's going to get it done
>> for sure. And so giving her the
flexibility is going to allow her to be
her most productive rather than
demanding she have x amount every single
day. And I think support can come in a
lot of ways, but the um financial burden
to a large corporation of having a stop
gap child care at work. So maybe if
you're not going to offer full child
care because you're getting a lot of
productivity out of women if they know
their children are on campus and can go
at lunchtime. But if you're not willing
to do that, if you have a stop gap where
instead of calling your attending or one
day my nanny didn't show up and I had to
find some way
just for those emergencies within the
corporation that breeds loyalty that
will increase productivity and so I
think it's money well spent.
>> Talk about having a competitive woman.
>> She would probably want to work for you.
>> Yeah. you know, and offering those
things to make her mothering easier
while she's trying to work. I think you
would have the most competitive
workforce.
>> And what does that mean? So that would
mean having a n is that having a nanny
on site or is that
>> take care on site? Take care on site. on
site again,
>> whether it's full-time, like bring your
children full-time there, or
>> that's a that's a big corporate, but but
a a smaller corporate commitment would
be this emergency child care so that
your kids's not there all the time, but
maybe they're sick or maybe somebody
didn't show up and then you have days
>> have a licensed childare provider
available, you know, who could
>> which is a fault of the US system
because Yeah. What happens in New
Zealand?
>> You have 20 hours free daycare
>> a week.
>> A week?
>> Yeah.
>> So, it's um Yeah. 20 hours funded. Uh
and then it's a very small nominal fee
for hours over that for up to year five
or when they're 5 years old cuz then
they start school
>> on the first day that they turn five.
It's like you turn five, happy birthday.
But it does help significantly
um kind of keep productivity and a
little bit of the worry off. What am I
going to do with my child?
>> Amazing.
>> Yeah.
>> What does this um conversation around
eggs and fertility dove tail into
menopause and specifically permenopause?
I guess that's the next
>> you can't have one without the other,
right? So per menopause is basically in
this fertility decline area. Okay. So
you don't fertility is not an issue. You
don't want to ever have a baby. You're
still going to go through pmenopause.
And so per menopause is defined
medically in the worst way as the
transition from normal menstrual cycles
to no menstrual cycle ever again. Okay.
So when we look at definitions,
menopause is defined as one year after
the final menstrual period. What it
really means is ovarian failure. And
that offends people, but that's actually
medically what it is. You have run out
of eggs and you run out of the ability
of the ovary to produce hormones. And so
per menopause begins
medically at the straw staging is the
very complicated um methodology to
define the stages of pmenopause and a
lot of it is based on menstrual cycle
irregularity but hormonally what's
happening starts well before our periods
become irregular. So as those egg levels
decline and and the ability to respond
to the stimulus coming from the brain,
remember ovulation starts in the brain.
So when estrogen levels normally get low
during the cycle, the brain doesn't like
it. The hypothalamus, so the gland in
our brain starts looking for estrogen.
It likes estrogen. And then when the
estrogen levels are high, it's happy.
And so when estrogen levels decline
naturally in a cycle, it says, "Whoop,
where's my where's my estrogen?" And it
sends a signal to a second gland in the
brain called the pituitary. And that
makes the LH and the FSH.
>> So I'm trying to figure out what causes
menop per pmenopause. What causes
menopause? Lack of eggs.
>> So it's the loss of eggs and the loss of
the the group of eggs to respond to
these signals. So here we go. We're
beginning pmenopause. We've reached a
critical threshold level where our
ovaries cannot respond. And that might
be I don't know millionaire.
>> So when you're not out of eggs but just
the count is low, right? Let's if you're
a jar. Yeah. Yeah. So if menopause is
going to be for simplicity, the jar is
empty. When the jar gets like this, so
we'll say if you had full, the jar is
not empty, but it's it's gotten lower.
And what is happening is the ovary
doesn't want to be out of eggs. So what
Dr. Haver is saying is the brain is
working harder to get an egg to grow
because the ovary becomes more stubborn.
It wants to hold on to them. It doesn't
want to lose them. The brain has to send
out stronger signals to get an egg to
grow. Because there's not as many, we
don't lose as many per month. So that's
great, but that means we have years of
being at this low unreliable ovary stage
where the brain is working really hard.
There's not as many eggs that are here.
They will still ovulate, but it starts
to happen at a less predictable rate.
But
>> so is that permenopause when there's
>> Yes. And there's not a definition I
think that which makes it the hardest of
say your point what number of eggs
equals per menopause. There is a unique
response to each person at what level
your ovary gets to where it will start
to respond dysfunctionally. But what
happens is that the hormone changes
start shifting in the brain. The ovarian
response starts shifting and before you
have irregular cycles, you will first
see a shortening of your cycles very
predictably. The brain will send out a
stronger signal. An egg will ovulate
faster. You'll start to get shorter
cycles. And then
>> there's hormone fluctuations,
>> but they're still regular. And so what
will happen is a woman will start to
feel these hormone shifts. It's less
predictable. She is having some change,
but it's still a regular cycle. And so
she is often told, "Your hormones are
fine. You have a regular cycle." So, and
in the brain, as we talked about those
neurotransmitters, there are not only is
estrogen changing and the amount that
we're producing, actually in
permenopause, quite often we'll have
much higher estradile levels than we did
in our premenopausal years where we had
that kind of predictable eb and flow of
our our monthly monthly hormones.
There's also independent FSH receptors
outside of so these hormones that are
pumping out to talk to the ovaries are
also back talking to different parts of
the brain. So the first symptoms that
patients feel and they've done a great
study on this is I don't feel like
myself.
I don't feel like myself. And they even
call it IDFM. And so you can't put your
finger on it. periods are regular, but
your environment hasn't changed. Your
normal stressors haven't changed. The
life you built that you could manage,
you're suddenly losing resilience.
>> And that's because of a hormone
fluctuation that is hard to
>> So, we see sleep disruptions, mental
health challenges increase, 40% increase
across pmenopause transition and the
cognitive changes and that is what
really scares my patients the most. And
they come in and most of them are, you
know, we're all high functioning in some
degree. Some of us in academia, some of
us in the O, some of us, but you know,
most women are high functioning because
they're juggling so many jobs. So even
if she didn't choose to go the routes
that we've chosen, she is managing
children, you know, school drop offs,
you know, all the things that women tend
to put on their plates. And suddenly
she can't remember all the things she
used to remember. Where are her keys?
You know, word salad. you're you're
struggling to find I can't tell you how
many times I am like I I see people and
like I cannot remember their names or I
can't remember I get in the car and I
can't remember where I'm going or what
my purpose of getting in the vehicle
was. You have to think for a second. And
so all of that is related to the
hormonal changes.
>> At what age?
>> Well, I think that there's a tendency in
medicine to want to have definitions.
>> Yes. So, I personally, and I know a lot
of us who talk all the time, think that
this random 366 days after your last
period, that's your menopause day. I
think that's pretty random. And I don't
know who made that up, but when I have
because I'm not an OB, but when I have
patients come in to me for their
muscularkeeletal things and they're of a
certain age and I don't just focus on
whatever the muscularkeeletal body part
is, but we start talking about their
whole health and they start talking
about these things, I am often the first
one to say to them, you know what, you
are probably in pmenopause. And they're
like, but my cycles are regular. I'm
like, but you are beginning this
transition which I call meolescence, but
it's this right. I would propose that
most people don't seek out a lot of help
earlier.
>> But they should just assume
>> that they're permenopausal anytime after
35 they don't feel like themselves and
start down a road of learning or
investigating or let's feel better and
what do I need to do about it?
>> You know, it's frustrating to us all of
us. We talked a little bit about this
last night is the people who kind of
make the rules, the institutions that
make the guidelines and and the academic
kind of
ivory tower, you know, they are like,
whoa,
back off, slow down. We shouldn't be
blaming everything on menopause, you
know, like. And I don't think that's
what we're saying. We're not trying
>> but completely dismissing the female
experience and not at all like including
this cataclysmic hormonal change
>> is hurting women. So the average age of
menopause is 51 to 52. And so let's say
that is when your ovaries are in
failure. They will no longer make eggs,
make hormones or respond to brain
signals.
>> So all the eggs, all the little marbles
are out
>> all the way gone at 51 52. For most
women about 7 to 10 years before that
they will start to enter into what we
will call pmenopause or the
unpredictable response of the ovary and
the brain. I say their communication
system their best friends who aren't
communicating well. Their signals are
getting interfered. They're not
responding appropriately. The ovary is
getting more stubborn. The brain is
trying to work harder. You get these
higher peaks, these lower troughs. And
essentially that is the time period. So
it is unique to an individual because
everybody's born with a different
number. They lose them at a different
rate. Some factors that we control
impact that rate, but some things that
we do not. Your mom's age of menopause
is a predictive factor. If you're had a
first-degree relative go through
menopause at 46 or sooner, you have a
six times likelihood of going into early
menopause.
>> So knowing having this conversation,
almost every patient I ask, what age did
your mom go through menopause? They do
not know the answer. because the moms
haven't talked about it.
>> Moms haven't talked about it. There's so
much stigma about reproductive health.
So, knowing that information is really
important if you have mom or older
sisters, what age is normal for your
family so that you can be a little more
in tune if there's some genetic
predisposition for you? The general idea
of what Dr. Haver is saying is that in
these last 7 to 10 years of ovarian
lifespan, it becomes more stubborn and
less predictable and it does cause
hormonal shifts that most women can't
detect with their cycles. We do know
that if you are actively tracking
actually when ovulation's happening and
looking at your follicular and ludial
phase and you know what's normal for
you, you will most likely be able to
detect these hormone shifts in that time
period. But that's not what women are
taught. Their tracking is just that it's
coming regular. And we do have a
generation of women that were on
contraception and then went through
childbearing and then on contraception
again until now they're suddenly
entering this transitional period and
they don't know what their own normal is
making it even worse.
>> Correct.
>> So like she said the average age of
menopause if we look at the math uh is
is 51 but under that 90th percentile
curve you know with 5% on each end it's
about 45 to 55. That's menopause, right?
>> That's full menopause. Now, now let's
just do math and back it up 7 to 10
years. So, we're looking at the mid to
late 30s to 40. So, when I have a 46,
47, 48y old patient come in who's still
cycling, she has almost 100% chance of
being in pmenopause just based on her
age alone, knowing the statistics around
that.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. So with my partner between the age
of sort of 35 to 45 is when I can expect
her to go through permenopause where
there's very little marbles left in the
jar. Um and her hormones might be
disabled less predictable
>> and one of the questions we had in from
the audience was how can I manage the
symptoms of permenopause and they use
the word naturally
>> well we don't have a single largecale
study done on the treatment of per
menopause. So, so let me break it down
for you. When we look at funding in
women's health, it's horrible. Okay? But
if we, if I go into PubMed, which is
the, you know, database that I go to
look up metal medical journal articles,
and I type in the word pregnancy, I will
get today 1.2ish million articles for
pregnancy. Amazing. So important. We
need healthy pregnancies. If I type in
the word menopause right now, I think
it's about 99,000.
So those numbers represent time, brain
power, funding,
what what what is important in women's
health. Okay. If I type in the word
perry menopause, we are about at 8,000.
>> Yep. Very very very very small. Your
name's on a couple of Thanks.
So is the last third of my life from an
academic standpoint, from funding, from
brain power, from where we focus not as
important
than when I had the ability to be
pregnant. More women will go through
pmenopause than menopause because we're
going to lose a few to accidents and
cancers and, you know, early deaths.
More women will go through pmenopause
then get pregnant. Yet in my training,
so in medical school, I got one hour one
one-hour lecture on menopause, nothing
on Perry. And in my OB/GYN training, and
I'd love to hear what you have to say,
as part of our reproductive
endocrinology blocks, I had one block of
that my second year. In those six weeks,
I got one one-hour lecture each week. No
clinics, no focus, nothing. And then as
a program director where I was in charge
of the education of residents of over
100 residents over about 10 years, I
knew exactly what the curriculum
required and menopause just gets shoved
into a tiny box.
>> And then what happens when we run out of
marbles in the the glass there?
>> What's really interesting and one thing
we've said a couple times is this
happens. This is ovarian failure. you're
going to go into a state of low estrogen
because the ovaries no longer have the
ability to make eggs. Therefore, they
are not going to make estrogen or
progesterone.
>> And just to be clear there, the eggs
were sending a signal up to the brain to
make estrogen.
>> And the eggs well the low the eggs in
the brain communicate. Yes. When you
didn't have an egg ovulating, your
estrogen would be low and that typically
is the brain signal to send out more
FSH. That's still happening. Meaning
estrogen is low, but the brain is
sending out all the FSH it has. FSH is
very high in menopause and the ovary
cannot respond because there's no more
eggs. There's nothing left to respond.
>> I need to explain that that explained
again. So, I'm trying to understand why
estrogen drops when the eggs disappear.
>> The estrogen is made from the cells that
surround each egg. So, when there's no
more eggs, there's no more cells that
make estrogen. Follicle goes away, too.
>> Okay. Okay. So, estrogen is made in
>> the ovaries. So the estrogen is made in
the ovaries and the primary type of
estrogen that we're talking about and
it's made from the cells that surround
each follicle called the granulosa
cells. And as the follicle gets bigger,
as the egg matures, more of those cells
become more active and you make more
estrogen. So even when you have a little
bit left
when you're on your period, we'll say,
but you're some eggs here, you're still
making some estrogen. It's not as high
as when you're ovulating, but these
little eggs will each make a little bit.
>> Do I make estrogen at times? You do,
>> but I just make it somewhere else.
>> Yeah. It gets converted over to
testosterone.
>> Okay.
>> So, we have enzymes in our body that
convert estrogen and testosterone back
and forth.
>> So, there's no more eggs. So, this is
menopause.
>> So, this is men. Well, in my world, yes,
ov this is ovarian failure. And we're
calling it ovarian failure on purpose
because at this moment, you're not going
to make estrogen. The brain is sending
out all the signals it can. Very high
FSH trying to get estrogen to be made.
There's no eggs, so there is no
estrogen. What Dr. Haver has said, which
is correct, our our friends in the
medical world do not define this moment
as menopause. They make you sit here and
be estrogen low for a year and have no
period for a year before they will say
you're in menopause. If they even decide
to treat
>> or offer treatment, you know, or even
begin the discussion because of our
training, you must thou shalt go without
one year. So, we're absolutely sure that
the ovaries have have moved on before we
would even consider.
>> But what is the point of that? We've
made estrogen our entire lives.
>> It's a fabulous question. That's a great
question.
>> Starving our brains, our hearts, our
bones, our muscles.
>> They didn't think they were doing that.
I don't think that people, you know, the
medical community has recognized
estrogen's effects outside of
reproduction until very recently. I
think there's been isolated pockets, but
there's no no one owns menopause. Like
no one you think it would be OBGYn, but
there's no one in charge of women's
health after reproduction ends.
>> Like there's there's no zar.
>> So what's the harm of waiting a year
before people take it seriously? What
happens?
>> Suicide, mental health changes, rapidly
declining bone density. I mean, you can
be healthy without estrogen.
>> Wants estrogen.
>> All vaginas need estrogen. So your
brain, your bones, your heart, your
blood vessels, your vagina,
>> your body has estrogen receptors
everywhere that we've already
established. And suddenly you've lost
the ability to make your primary source
of estrogen. And what happens is that,
you know, medicine has a lot of
definitions that we use that are very
antiquated. Even how we date
pregnancies, right? When we talk about
how far along you are in a pregnancy, we
date back to the last period you had,
which meant 2 weeks of pregnancy or
before you ever ovulated an egg, before
you 3 weeks before you ever implanted an
embryo. Yet, we still use this pregnancy
timeline based on when your last period
was, even though we know two weeks of
that you weren't in fact pregnant at
all.
>> Now, menopause, in my opinion, is the
exact same way. We're using an
antiquated definition saying you have to
prove to me you're an ovarian failure by
lack of your period for 12 months
because it represents a time period
where we didn't fully understand what
was happening in the ovary or didn't
have the ability to test and know what
we know now. We are making women suffer
to get that diagnosis. If I believe I
shouldn't treat you until you have
menopause, you have to prove that you're
in it. I don't think it's where we're
going. I don't think it's what's right
for women. And that being this low
estrogen is hugely impactful at your
life at any age. The female body needs
estrogen to function normally.
>> I mean, I'm looking at this chart here
about suicidation. Yeah. Suicide.
>> So, the most likely time for a woman to
commit suicide is between the ages of 45
and 55.
>> And do you is do you think that's linked
to
>> 100% menopause?
>> Right. So we know that mental health
we have an increase in mental health
disorders either pre-existing getting
worse or new onset of about 40% across
the transition. And we look at um SSRI
prescriptions which are
anti-depressants. They double across the
menopause transition. Now there's a
couple reasons for that. One is we
weren't treating menopause with
hormones. So they just SSRIs can
actually help a hot flash. Uh certain
types. So, you know, Paxel is one of the
ones that has been proven to decrease
hot flashes some. It's not great, but it
works a little bit. And with all of the
mental health changes, a lot of women
are ending up on these anti-depressant
medications.
>> So, we don't want to go a year without
estrogen. So, we know that some of the
new data coming out when I was
researching for the new pmenopause,
there's a really great window of using
hormones to treat mental health
disorders um and seeing improvement in
mood and also some in cognition by
giving estrogen or estrogen plus the
progesterine early in pmenopause before
the periods actually stop ra and that
actually works better than an SSRI. So,
say she's on an on an SSRI and has done
well. She's had a long history of
depression. Suddenly, she's not
controlled. Suddenly, her symptoms are
back and she's on the same medication.
Rather than doubling or adding a second
agent,
>> we really should be giving these women a
hormonal therapy.
>> Now, that doesn't hold postmenopause.
So, this is really a pmenopausal kind of
window of opportunity.
>> In postmenopause, they aren't responding
as well and probably because the
estrogen labels have stabilized. So when
we give a woman back
>> adapts yeah you'll adapt. So
postmenopause the menopause um that's
why the suicide rates kind of peak in
this key per menopause area and we think
and so in postmenopause
they the hormone levels stabilize so
women tend to get better and so they do
respond better to the SSRIs for for new
onset anxiety and depression in those
patients.
>> And I want to do a randomized control
trial where we add some creatine.
>> Oh that would be amazing. 20 g of
>> Well, no, it's 38 per kilogram of body
gram. Yes.
>> So, you're saying if I'm a 45year-old
woman and I'm I've still got my
menstrual cycle
>> Mhm.
>> at that time before I've hit menopause,
>> I should be considering some type of
hormonal therapy. So when we give
someone menopausal dosed menopause
hormone therapy in the form of estradile
usually in a patch because you have that
nice steady state it is enough to feed
back to the hypo to that brain to calm
down but not enough to suppress
ovulation. So she's often giving
estrogen support in very low doses and
menopause hormone therapy is basically
micro doing compared to what we do
naturally. And so we're giving enough to
calm the brain down and stabilize what's
happening in the brain without
suppressing her natural ovulation.
giving enough what?
>> To raise you back to maybe what that
baseline would be.
>> Giving enough estrogen. Correct. Giving
enough estrogen to raise the baseline
level so it's not as low. It's not so
high that it's preventing ovulation, but
it's going to alleviate some of these
drastic highs and lows that you're
having and it's going to create a more
stable hormone environment.
>> It's the delta that we were talking
about post pregnancy. The delta
chaos. The space is what bothers us, not
the high nor the low eventually.
>> So,
I have uh I run out of eggs and then I'm
by definition menopausal at this stage
and
my body adapts.
So, there's going to be a drop and then
there's going to be a
>> We're specifically talking about mental
health because you brought up the
suicide chart. Uh and so postmenopause
like once everything calms down and
you're fully menopausal you're out of
the zone of chaos. The hormones have
just your bones continue to deteriorate
a lot of other things are happening but
our cognit our mental our brain tends to
calm down and things get better in the
brain.
>> When do I become postmenopausal instead
of menopausal?
>> Oh go menopause is a day right medically
menopause is one day in your life. one
day exactly after your final menstrual
period.
>> That's the point of that random agree,
right? Because what if what if it's leap
year? Do we go 366 days? What if it's
what if you've had an IUD? What if
you've had all these things? It's like
it's really a antiquated definition and
we really need to modernize.
>> So, it's really you're permenopausal,
then you're postmenopausal.
>> Correct.
>> Right.
>> Okay. And when I'm postmenopausal
>> forever,
>> forever.
>> That's your new biological state.
>> That's right. for now. I'm sure
someone's working on something to change
something.
>> I do wonder that. I do wonder if they're
they're going to figure out a way to
>> extend fertility. I mean, they're
trying.
>> They're trying.
>> But then I think about it as if you're a
60-year-old woman, would you still want
to be
>> worried about
>> worried about that?
>> So, what they're doing is looking at is
there a way to extend
>> we'll say ovarian function. ovarian
function with lowle baseline
>> enough to keep you out of osteop you
know enough to slow that down and heart
disease protect your heart without
pregnancy
>> I'm now post menopausal lots of things
change in my body I'm guessing because I
I no longer have the same levels of
estrogen
>> did the levels of estrogen ever go up
again naturally or do I then need to
start considering
>> outside of a tumor no I mean
>> so do I need to consider hormone
replacement therapies and things like
that to
>> you might
>> and that will help me fend off what the
sleep issues, the
>> it'll slow the rate of change,
>> okay?
>> But it doesn't stop it. You still have
to put in your lifestyle modifications
to improve andor stop the circenia and
the bone density loss and all the things
that people associate with
postmenopause.
>> And did any of you have menopause
hormone therapy?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> Mhm.
>> And what was the decision and what what
impact has it had? So, I think what
Stacy just said in framing where we're
going with this conversation is so now
we're permenopausal. It's a new
physiology.
What used to work for all of our
exercising if we even did because we
know it at least in this country that 60
to 80% of people aren't intentional with
their lifestyle. So to frame this next
part of the conversation, I'm sure we're
going to talk a lot about hormones, and
I'll tell you my hormone decision-m, but
uh I think it's important to all of us.
It's only one of the building blocks to
rebuilding a great life, right? It's
interesting that the five steps of
fertility that you went over are
actually
>> exactly the same.
>> Curious, isn't it?
>> It is. It's it's
great protein and anti-inflammatory
nutrition. It's a cardiovascular fitness
life. It's a lifting life. It's a stress
detox whether it's environmental or
relational. And
>> sleep,
>> sleep.
>> And then yes, hormones are really uh a
critical building block. But as we enter
the conversation,
women are sentient beings and we get to
decide
and we get to make the changes because
we have agency. So what we're going to
describe is not a one-sizefits-all.
>> It is
>> it's all the tools on the tools.
>> Put the tools on the table.
>> So I choose if I'm going to work my
proverbial rear end off to be the best I
can be for the rest of my life. I choose
to use all the tools. Not everybody does
that. But to choose one tool and think
that's going to be enough, it never is.
>> Right. So when I decided to and I've
been pretty public about my journey in
this because you think I would have
known after 22 years of formal education
and all this and being an aging a
muscularkeeletal aging researcher, you
would have think thought I would have
known. But I honestly looking back maybe
thought I was never going to age because
I was so healthy, right?
So I have a baby at 40. I breastfeed
till almost 41 and a half, 42. And then
I'm back at my very quickly 5 weeks, my
high power, high capacity to career.
But things were getting really different
about 45 for me and I think I went right
from postpartum
to perry menopause with very little
downtime. So chaotic hormones to almost
and so
I suffered for a while at 47. Uh I I
talk about it like I I went from this
really high capacity to thinking I was
going to die not only because of night
sweats, brain fog, the thing that lots
of women have. But I started having
heart palpitations. And I call my
cardiology friend because I worked at a
university. I'm like Ricky Ricky I think
I'm dying. So he did put me on a stress
test and my heart was perfect right at
that point. And then I had arthralgia
which is total body pain. It's part of
the inflammatory response of not having
estrogen. It's part of the
muscularkeeletal syndrome of menopause
uh assembly of symptoms. so much that I
go from training
to almost not being able to get out of
bed and these my experience of not
knowing what was coming and hitting a
wall is not uncommon,
>> right? And so I started educating myself
and being an acquired expert. I read
what I consider the world's data on
safety of hormone optimization as I like
to call it and I made the decision that
I was going to do all the tools. I was
going to learn to lift heavy again which
I hadn't done since high school cuz I
was a runner and I changed the way I do
my cardio and I changed my diet and I am
so committed to sleep. do not call me
after 9:30 at night because I am going
to be in bed and just the
>> the quiet times of d-stress. But I also
decided to um augment or to optimize my
hormones with estradiol,
with progesterone because I have a
uterus and after I felt comfortable with
those with very small doses of
testosterone and that makes me feel like
myself again, not just one because I
think sometimes people think that you
can just make a hormone decision and
feel like yourself again. It takes
lifestyle
>> plus or minus this decision.
>> Is there a stigma associated with that
decision? Um
>> taking hormones.
>> Taking the hormones, but also I guess
just more broadly with entering
>> menopause. Yeah.
>> Um I think there is there is absolutely
I mean you can just look at popular
media. You can look at their
representation.
>> Go right now and give me an image.
>> It's decreasing because of you though.
Like we have to acknowledge you are
decreasing the stigma.
>> True. and you're sitting at the table
with us.
>> I say that I think because there's a
woman in my life who was telling me
about her decision to start taking
menopause hormone therapy and she
described the moment with her husband
when she was looking at the box.
>> Mhm.
>> And she was staring at the box and
staring at the box and staring at the
box and mulling it and there was clearly
something emotional going on there that
this decision to take this marks
something
>> which is interesting because no one
really questions OC's.
>> Exactly. Oral contraceptive birth
control birth control
>> and I treat both men and women and when
a man comes into my clinic with low
energy popping all the tendons all over
his body everything hurts we very
quickly test his testosterone and send
him with no judgment because he's trying
to be viral and I think it goes with the
general composa conversation about aging
women when men talk about living longer
>> it's called longevity and we celebrate
that and we take pictures of movie stars
in the south of France very
distinguished distinguished with their
grain temples when women when we talk
about women living longer
>> until right now cuz we're all screaming
about it it's under the guise of
anti-aging
>> a superficial like oh my god don't let
her age so I think part of that is the
stigma of menopause somehow because
we're no longer able to have a
there's not a value. We've aged out of
the game,
>> which hopefully we're pivoting this
narrative because as I said earlier,
women are winning the longevity battle.
We already live longer, but it's how
we're living that we're trying to course
correct.
>> Yeah. And it's not just humans that go
through this. Like I like using the
whale analogy cuz whales go through it
and then the whales that are no longer
reproductive become like
>> the senior everyone all the other little
whales listen to them. is like I want to
be like a whale where you have this
seniority and and respect the wisdom
wisdom keepers.
>> Yeah,
>> exactly.
>> I love this part of my life.
>> You love this part of your life?
>> Yes.
>> Why?
>> I have never felt like I've
been in exactly where I'm supposed to
be. In this moment, I feel like I'm
helping more people. I have better
relationships. I'm having better sex.
I'm having better, you know, everything
in my life pretty much is better. And I
I don't know if like menopause and and
life circumstances have just given me
permission to like cut out the crap and
focus on what's really important
>> and, you know, don't sweat the small
stuff,
you know, it's like like something kind
of switches in our brain.
>> No filters. It's amazing. And I don't
think I could have done this 10 years
ago. I was too worried about what people
thought. I was too worried about being a
good girl and following the rules and
checking the boxes and never stepping
outside of the guidelines. But until I
realized that I wasn't really serving
the population that I trained for x
amount of years to that, you know, and
they were being left behind
is really what allowed me to like be
where I am today.
>> I think most of us describe this as the
most authentic. We're actually who we
were made to be. And the confidence we
feel comes from our memories of success.
I think that's where confidence come
from. We remember everything that we
have learned to fix over time. Probably
we could figure anything out. And so
that comes with experience and frankly
it comes with aging. The price of aging
or the pre the price of having wisdom
and experience is aging, right? And so
the the reps and so you get to this
place and you're like, I'm going to
figure this out. We're going to figure
this out.
>> And I don't want the younger generations
to have to go through the stuff that
we've gone through. So if I can share my
experiences to help them navigate, then
that is a good thing.
>> Yeah, I'm in pmenopause, so I'm a
slightly different stage. And I know
this because my cycles are shorter, but
they're still very regular. Used to be
28 29 days. Now they're 25 26. I know
that means I have less eggs coming out
of my vault every month and that's why
I'm ovulating sooner. But I can feel all
the hormonal shifts much more profoundly
than before. Now, as a reproductive
endocrinologist, what we call a
fertility doctor, most fertility doctors
now do IVF day in and day out. And
there's a lot of corporate reasons why
that is. But we're also trained in
puberty, premature ovarian failure, and
hormones. So, I'm more of a cowboy and
quite cavalier at giving estrogen. We
even told these ladies last night, oh,
>> because I see it. I see people who are
low estrogen states and you know, every
single day, how it impacts their life.
So, I am on lowd dose estrogen right
now, even though I'm still cycling. I'm
still making my own progesterone, so I
don't have to take a progesterone right
now. But, it clearly makes a difference
in my day-to-day function and how I
feel. And most REI like I am will
jokingly say like you'll put me in the
ground on estrogen because it has such a
profound impact on you're able how you
can function and specifically if we're
not forcing you to go through this empty
glass period for years and years and
years of your life
>> there's more opportunity on how you can
slow down part of the process that we
all know is going to happen with aging
but to live I think pond do is it you
know healthier your health span how are
you going to live healthy longer not
just live longer
>> well and I think your approach that I
think it's part of the decision making
is critical because
>> uh
35 to 45 and early pmenopause are prime
times for prevention
>> right it's to get our standards set
>> you don't have to lose your bone like
you're going to get
>> but it's hard for women to get care and
we also have to acknowledge that if you
go into
>> right if you what you're recommending
and I also do the same thing for my
patients
>> very hard for somebody to get care for
>> this is not happening in 99%
>> of doctor's offices like there is no
birth control pill or nothing which is
all they were taught
>> given that even in menopause only 4% of
women have chosen or have been educated
the pros and cons of hormone
optimization
and then to ex that's without that's an
empty jar person
>> so 4% Stephen
>> is that How many women that have
>> said 2023 they did a study in the US.
I'm not sure in other countries and on
FDA approved. So when we add in
compounding it's maybe a little bit
higher but when you look at FDA
prescriptions only 4% of eligible women
meaning no risk factors right age are
are utilizing are going to get their
prescriptions filled. Evidently this is
going to change right with the education
that you guys
>> we hope at least they're being offered
it and having a discussion so that each
one
>> they may choose not to the right and
that's their right but
>> side effects are there side effects
worth noting I know a lot of people are
quite scared of taking sen hormones
>> so there's risks and then there's side
effects so when we look at the side
effect profile anytime we give a woman
estrogen progesterone and we'll have to
like look at them individually but
estrogen you can have headaches you can
have irregular bleeding about 50% of
patients and more on the patch than on
oral.
>> There's a patch and there's oral. Vonda,
you take the patch, right?
>> I do.
>> And that's on your stomach.
>> Yeah, it's right here actually.
>> And how often do you have to replace
that?
>> Twice a week.
>> Okay, fine. And
>> yeah. So, so when we look at menopause
hormone therapy, we have estrogen, we
have progesterrogens, and then we have
testosterone basically. And there's
different ways to get it into your body.
There's oral and non-oral roughly. So,
in oral it's pill, you take it. In
non-oral, we're looking at through the
skin or through the mucosa. So mucosa
could be under the tongue. It could be
in the vagina. So mucosa is like the
gastrointestinal tract is lined with
mucosa and it's a nice way to absorb and
in the rectum to absorb medication. We
don't have a rectal form of estrogen
yet. And so um so and then there's also
injectables so you can inject it
straight into the muscle or subcutaneous
tissues. So most commercially available
like FDA approved. We're looking at a
ring for the mucosa. We're looking at a
patch for transdermal or we're looking
at pills for oral.
>> And what do you take?
>> Yes. So, I am on a patch. Um, and I've
just been I'm not a great absorber
through my skin. Um, and I couldn't get
my estradile levels high enough where
studies are looking like the best bone
protection is. So, I've added about a
half milligram of oral estradile at
night. I'm on oral micronized
progesterone, which is probably the best
way to get it into our system. And I
tolerate progesterone very well. And
testosterone. And I am on a gel that is
FDA approved. We I'm borrowing the men's
version because we don't have an FDA
approved version
>> for women
>> in this country for women. So
>> I don't think anywhere is
>> borrow my husband.
>> Australia.
>> And I think the UK just has approved
one. This is new
>> some news like in the last month.
>> Yeah.
>> So okay. So um okay. So, so it's it's
broadly advisable
after doctor's consultation to take some
form of hormone therapy.
>> Definitely if you're symptomatic, if you
have the classic visual motor symptoms,
it's absolutely the gold standard.
>> But can I comment on that?
>> Women say to me all the time either, I
don't have I don't feel that bad
or they say I want to do this naturally.
And those are the things that say okay
fine, do it naturally. But
brain fog, night sweats in the V and hot
flashes are not the only thing going on.
And so if you're making this decision
fully informed, well, you're a sentient
being. Make the incision. But you cannot
feel your bones crumbling until they're
broken. You cannot feel that. You cannot
feel your muscle going away. You cannot
feel your brain starving. You can't
detect microvascular disease of your
heart. So, you may think you're getting
away with something and maybe you don't
have night sweats, brain fog,
but it doesn't mean you're not having a
different physiology. And if you are
fully aware of that and make a decision
that you don't want to optimize your
hormones, that's your decision. And I'm
fine with that. But what I'm not fine
with is people thinking they're getting
away with something when they're not.
>> True. I
>> You're making the decision based on fear
and not facts.
>> Correct.
>> My last question is about love and sex
in and menopause. You said you're having
the best ex of your life, Mary. And um
I've also heard you talk about how
several people in this season of life
end up getting divorces. You said they
throw the the trash out. So when I
So when we talk about, you know,
menopause can
spur, you know, for some women it's it's
this mo moment of empowerment. They
realize they have to circle the wagons
cuz the only way they're going to
survive through this cataclysmic, you
know, upheaval for so many women is to
get rid of relationships that aren't
working. Put up boundaries and sometimes
that's going to be the end of a
marriage. Other times it's going to
strengthen a relationship because you're
you're kind of cutting out things that
were getting in the way of your so I see
many marriages or many relationships
really improve through the transition.
But it it does take two. You know, sex
is biocschosocial. So like when I I look
at sex it's not I think of the entire
experience you know and one as far as my
desire for the frequency testosterone
does seem to have given that an uptick.
So it is approved you know we have lots
of studies done on libido for women
which is in medicine we say hypoactive
sexual desire disorder and it has to
bother you. So a lot of women are like I
don't want to have sex ever again I
don't care. There's nothing wrong with
that, right? Unless it affects your
relationship and it it bo it has to
bother you. But I have a lot of patients
who come in and say, "I love him. I used
to want to do it. We used to have a
really great frequency and everybody was
happy about it. It was something I look
forward to, enjoy it, and now there's
nothing. I have nothing." And for those
patients, testosterone can be helpful.
Not for everyone, right? And so there's
other emerging data on looking at the
muscular skeletal system. I am naturally
thin. I was not an athlete growing up.
At best, I was a dancer, you know, and I
didn't do anything to protect my muscles
and bones as as I was coming up through
the ranks. And so, here I am in my 50s
just getting out of endurance, you know,
you know, recreational endurance
training and thinking, what have I done
to my bones and muscles? I laid on that
DEXA scan as nervous as I've ever been
in my life, like getting my board
scores, nervous, like, what have I done?
And and it wasn't bad, okay? But I'm
like, but I like to be perfect. So, I'm
like, what can I do to, you know, I'm
doing the I'm eating the protein, I'm
lifting the weights, I'm starting to do
all these things. And we know that women
who have naturally higher testosterone
levels from genetics or whatever, have
less frailty as they age cuz that's my
focus. If I run the cancer gauntlet,
which probably 80% of my aunts and
uncles have died of cancer. And so if I
run that gauntlet and I'm doing
everything lifestyle and preventative
screening to do that and then the women
end up with dementia frailty like my
mother and grandmother. So I'm like,
"Okay, I want to have as much bone and
muscle strength as I can. So I'm going
to add some testosterone and see what
happens." I I at the time would not have
said I had any sexual dysfunction. I did
not qualify medically for HSDD.
I go on testosterone and there's
definitely an uptick in the area and
everyone is happier like my interest has
improved my initiation has improved and
that had kind of waned time and stress
and kids and whatever the other thing we
were empty nesting at the same time so
that probably no more kids busting in
our door at 2 in the morning letting us
know they're home from you know whatever
experience and you guys will go through
this later but also our communication is
better you know my husband's retired
from Chevron and we are building this
this company together, you know, our
menopause company. And so our
relationship has actually improved
through all of that. So all of the
things that feed into
what we know is female desire and has is
just better all the way around and and I
think testosterone had a little bit to
do with it. My ability to like focus and
my ability to prioritize and put up the
right boundaries has really helped with
that. And we're just having a lot of
more fun with it. But I think that we
would be remiss in this part of the
conversation, and I'll say it. I'm the
orthod, but I'm gonna say it anyway.
Many men, I just talked to my husband
publicly about this because we're trying
to educate men, is that most men don't
realize that in pmenopause, as estrogen
waines, it affects all tissues. And
there is an entity called the genital
urinary syndrome of menopause where the
vagina will actually atrophy and all the
external soft uh tissues that are
usually used to engorging will become
dry like a desert and Stephen sex can
feel like razor blades
>> and men don't know that and women are
afraid to tell their partners. So the
men feel rejected like why doesn't she
love me or desire me anymore and it may
be that but it's probably not that it's
it hurts and I bleed
>> and women don't know that this is normal
when you're estrogen is in not that it's
okay to
>> it shouldn't be it shouldn't be normal
but when you're in a low estrogen state
regard menopause birth control pills can
do it postpartum breastfeeding even you
know progesterone IUD these can all
cause time periods where your estrogen
levels are low enough that the vaginal
tissue is not having the right collagen
and elasticity that it should.
>> So, what's the solution?
>> Not lubricant.
>> Lubricant can sometimes aid, but that's
not a root cause, right? It'll help with
I I help with symptoms, right? But if
your part of the problem is that the
tissue can't respond as it should, that
it's frail, that delay orgasm, then we
really want to get to the root cause,
which is estrogen is crucial for skin
elasticity.
>> It's like men going on testosterone,
right? If he's not having an erection,
there are 29 solutions for that right
now,
>> but primarily funded solutions as well.
>> Solutions. But for women, it's not just
desire, it's physiologic. And so
>> vaginal estrogen put putting something
up
>> putting in your vagina
>> and what you put in your vagina is
>> so there's there's several options. We
have creams, we have pills, there's a
ring specifically designed just for
that. So we have different methods of
getting the vag you know estrogen into
the vagina. There's also um uh something
called prosterone which is DHEA
basically which is a pre hormone that
the vagina miraculously will convert to
estrogen and testosterone. So but it's
expensive. It tends to not be covered by
insurance. But for our like our sex med
friends, sexual medicine friends who
specialize in this female sexual
function, they love it because you're
not only getting a boost of estrogen to
the vagina, you're also getting
testosterone and there are testosterone,
you know, receptors in the vulva, you
know, in the lower vagina and around the
skin around the vagina as well.
>> But here's the bonus.
All of this plus vaginal estrogen will
help prevent chronic UTI which kill old
ladies and it will help support the
pelvic floor and the uh uterus from
prolapsing and so it has all these added
benefits and here's another bonus it is
such low dose
>> it is not systemic so any risk that you
could think of that you might not want
to do systemic estrogen including breast
cancer
>> is unaffected by vaginal estrogen and so
it is a huge solution. And there's no
age that a woman can't go on it. She'll
kill me. She'll never know this. But I
put my 86-year-old mother on it so that
we could prevent UTI and failure of
tissue so she didn't get sores and
infections, right? Isn't that a miracle?
I know Stephen's like,
>> "Yeah, and we should say that vaginal
estrogen in preparations made for
vaginal estrogen or lowd dose estrogen
preparations. You can give oral
estradiol vaginally and it will be
systemically absorbed because the vagina
is highly absorptive. So I don't want
somebody to hear this and think that but
just saying we often prescribe or
recommend
>> a local treatment of vaginal estrogen
products which are in very low dose and
they really impact the local tissues of
we'll say the pelvic floor, the urinary
system, the vulva, the vagina and they
improve your well-being and your health
without some of the risk that might come
from systemic hormones in somebody who
may not want to take them.
>> I am all out of questions. So I wanted
to conclude this segment just by asking
you what the most important thing that I
have missed on the subjects we've talked
about menstrual cycles, menopause,
everything in between. What is the most
important subject you think we might
have missed?
>> I think we covered it but but to stay
that you control a large part. We said
over and over inflammation and insulin
resistance. We we touched on different
lifestyle factors that impact this
because
>> when your body is having hormone change,
>> there's a lot of the external world
around you or the choices you're making
that can make some of that better or
worse or influence what is happening.
>> And I know we're going to go over more
of this, but I think this idea that I
have no control over what's happening to
me isn't 100% true. I mean, you don't
have control over when some of this
stuff happens, but you can take control
of a situation by understanding your
body, knowing what's happening, knowing
how to advocate for yourself, and making
active decisions to live a healthier,
better life.
>> Yes, that's the goal is to empower women
to understand, to ask the questions so
they don't feel like something is
happening to them and they don't have
control or options,
>> which is what our mother's generation
had. They were always gas lit, told, you
know, it's all in your head.
>> There's nothing we can do.
>> So, my mother was put on but it was
called butol.
Um, it's basically a sedative and it was
mother's little helper. And I found an
old magazine article where they if you
look at the magazine articles from the
50s and 60s on these medications, mostly
sedatives that were given to women. It's
like now she can do the laundry again.
Now she she's flipping a pancake in the
ad in the apron in the 1950s, you know,
like get your mom back, get your wife
back.
>> And it was a combination of estrogen
plus a seditive. And I was just
absolutely floored. And I remember mom's
little bottle and it was called butol
and I it would sit on her counter and
she would talk about it like it was her
talisman like it was her and I always
thought of it as mommy's little helper
you know like oh I need my butol oh this
happened where's my butol where's my
butol and when I was researching and
writing and reading about these
sedatives that were given in women I was
like wait mama I remember the bottle I
remember what it was called cuz she
talked about it all the time I went and
looked it up and it's a derivative of
pheninoarbatl.
>> Oh my gosh.
>> And it was heavily prescribed to women.
So
>> barbbituate. It's a a drug.
>> It's a class of drug that is basically a
sedative. We use it in surgery. We use
it for seizures.
>> And they were sedating my mother on the
daily.
>> Yep.
>> Through her pmenopause.
>> Mhm.
>> Now she had eight kids. She was running
a restaurant. You know, she was very
high functioning. And I just refused for
that to be that was her reality. Yeah.
>> And here she lies in a bed with
Alzheimer's and a fractured hip and she
hasn't walked in 8 months. You know,
she's she's just now getting on a walker
8 months after her hip fracture and from
osteoporosis who's never had a bone
density scan in her life. And like our
our children deserve better. It's not
going to be my future cuz I have the,
you know, I have the means. I have
access. But like I I want every young
girl, all of our children to
>> have a better future than what was
offered to our mothers.
>> Exactly.
>> I think ending this, I would want every
woman to approach her midlife
life, her new life with the same vigor
and the same curiosity and the same
demanding of care that she would do for
one of her children if her child is
sick. She's not going to take no. She's
not going to take being blown off. She's
going to keep searching till the end of
the earth until she finds an answer. And
that's what that is the same kind of
taking control that I want women to do
about this time in their lives.
>> Thank you so much. We're going to record
we're going to continue this
conversation for the viewers that are
listening at home. Um, I've been through
all of these wonderful books that I have
in front of me and there's so many
lifestyle, nutrition, exercise related
solutions to many of the things we've
talked about today to be an truly
optimized um, hormone healthy menstrual
cycle healthy woman, which I want to
talk about in our part two of this
conversation.
[Music]